---
layout: post
title:  "In Place of Politics"
date:   2018-09-04
categories: [politics]
---

In our ‘instant’ culture – instant food, instant information, instant dopamine, instant rejection for a credit card - it seems politics remains determined to buck the trend. The problem is that political patience is a virtue we can no longer fathom. Do we blame bureaucracy, claim political incompetence or guilt societal progress for leaving politics behind? Either way the taboo Brexit has become is worrying for politics. The process feels anachronistic. While the purist may say ‘these things take time’, the modern citizen can be heard over this with a chorus of ‘have they done it yet?’.

Brexit was wonderful news when it exploded into the public sphere. It wasn’t necessarily good news, but it was wonderful for the news. It stimulated something in peoples stubborn disposition towards politics: conversation. To utter the word ‘politics’ was no longer a tacit crime; no longer was it met with rolling eyes or sudden urges to go to the bathroom, instead it became something people found themselves talking about whether they liked it or not. Debate would ensue. Passionate rants about CAP and the fishing industry came out of people’s mouths as much to their own surprise as to those around them. Under the guidance of our own belligerence and plagiarising of luminaries everyone who disagreed with us suddenly became myopic. Yet with a deadline set for 2019 the subject was inevitably going to become trivial, especially given the lack of noteworthy progress in negotiations. The narrative is that of a promising TV show ruined by greedy producers running out of script ideas. This was 12 Angry Men suddenly turned into 6 seasons. Here we are in Season 5 where the people have forgotten what they’re arguing about, or should I say debating, and discourse has become banal. No decision can be reached, the only glimmer of hope remains a deadline, a cut-off point. From now on everything is negligible except the outcome, the last episode. The toing and froing of glorified insults between the EU and British politicians is no longer worth our attention, because its longevity has made it utterly meaningless. We’ve seen it all before.  In today’s age politics can only hold our attention for so long and it’s safe to say it wasted its moment in the spotlight. Now that we have retracted back into our apathy, all we can do is look out for a headline of ‘It’s Over’. This retrogression should be a wake-up call for politics, we’re an impatient electorate.   

Persevering with Brexit has been a struggle. Modernity is full of distractions; some important, others artificial. You could say it doesn’t matter that people have lost interest, all that matters is they turned up to vote and they’ll know what happened at the end. Yet the middle period can be just as important as the bookends, after all would you walk out of a film only to return for the final scene hoping to be as immersed as you were at the start? When the film ends it will undoubtedly have left very little impression whatsoever. Of the templated three acts in a film the middle is typically the longest and revolves around a protagonist attempting to overcome some form of problem, be it internal or external. In the case of Brexit the problem is a chaotic hybrid of the two: our attention has dispersed and politics remains an esoteric mess. The fact is that politics, like any other industry, must keep up with the times no matter how comprehensive its authority. Yet at the highest points of power it feels increasingly aloof creating a situation that even the most patient politically-orientated people must start looking elsewhere. It seems hard to believe that this is a generational problem with a lack of staying power, and even if it is there is little to gain and a lot to lose for a politician to put their finger on this. Politicians need to realise that the current Brexit narrative, riddled with faux pas, is leaving people drifting further from its democratic symbolism. People are once again distancing themselves from politics and what they see in Westminster is a disillusioned parliament failing to grasp where it keeps going wrong. No wonder populism is popular.

If you don’t like what’s being said then change the conversation. Those people seemingly in an informed position still turn up for TV debates, still write newspaper articles and post apparently endless Twitter threads on the matter in a desperate attempt to pick a new angle. In this attempt to re-establish our attention the Brexit discourse is no longer about democracy but has the all-too-familiar feel of personnel politics. The quality of debate has regressed into election propaganda (nothing new there) with politicians scrambling to stick their name into the quite frankly, dishevelled hat. As incumbent politicians attempt to get to grips with 21st century Machiavellianism, a large part of me wonders whether to them Brexit means anything other than an opportunity for their own political self-determination. Calls for another referendum are the apogee of this perversity. Because while politicians have been surfeiting Brexit at least we had a tangible democratic result as proof that politics is something we should inherently care about. Real change bringing real problems and possibilities, with no chance of the empty promises or empty threats embedded in politicians vernacular getting in the way. Hence a second referendum is entirely counterproductive, not because of the possibility of the same outcome or logistical problems, but because it completely undermines the first. Why should anyone take the second decision seriously when the first was not treated as the ultimatum it was? Of course the subsequent process of leaving can be iterated, and that is what negotiation is for, but to suggest the people should have another say in what happens next makes people ask ‘isn’t that what politicians are for?’. Even if the plug has to be pulled, it must be politicians who make that call. Politics remains determined to trip over its own feet, but that won’t stop Brexit dominating the media with a desperate permanence. But to say the least, the public is fed up with words, how is it the saying goes? actions speak louder…

This was an opportunity for politics to prove it had a pivotal place in the 21st century. Brexit was meant to be an embodiment of democracy, but Instead it has left people confused and in a state more dangerous than anger: indifference. The portrayed upshot will still be that the referendum was a win for democracy but the process has felt like a win for demagoguery, which will ultimately draw people further into their apathy, further into the cave. Faustian politicians have made the possible improbable. There is a Catch-22 in British politics at the moment in that people need inspiring and charismatic politicians to induce conversation and yet politics needs an attentive, conversation driven electorate to invoke those that fit that persona. However this a problem for another day because Brexit, outcome aside, was about something more than this: it was about modern politics proving us wrong and that it could provide us with what democracy has been about since its inception: opportunity. It appears Socrates’ scepticism was right, maybe we are just citizens of demagogues. Citizens asking ourselves the fatal question for politics: does it really matter?

