---
layout: post
title:  "The Desperation of Deceptive Headlines"
date:   2019-08-16
categories: [politics]
---


Headline – NEWSPAPER HEADLINE FOUND TO BE DECEPTIVE. I am torn as to whether this would be an effective headline – a shocking and reprehensive conclusion, yet on the other hand it appears a seemingly self-evident truth. I hate to use the word truth because really what do we mean by truth when we think of political news. Is truth some unreachable ideal, washed away in the melee of attention-grabbing competition; a cataclysmic bloodbath for the honest, objective, truth-seeker perhaps. The reaction to The Telegraph’s headline ‘Public backs Johnson to shut down Parliament for Brexit’ (12/08/2019) was textbook stuff in the risk versus reward of a deceptive headline. A customary glance at the newspaper section would be enough to convince some that maybe they should be getting behind this Johnson bloke as well. Herding is not uncharacteristic in politics. Yet if the success of an article is dependent on making the headline as big as possible and the text as small as possible, then there is clearly something terribly wrong with the model. How can this be treated as an article to inform or enlighten when its success is dependent on not reading the small print. There is a pervasive and yet well-noted trend in politics that our consumption of it is largely dependent on sound bites, headlines and 280 characters. 

So who is to blame for this perversion, is it the newspaper for mocking our ability to read beyond a headline, or is it the internet for making it a question of deceive or die for newspapers, or is it just us the public who deep down covet this kind of episode so we can pick our wittiest and most screenshot-worthy 280 characters to heckle the headline, but not oust the writer. In Balzac’s 19th century masterpiece *Lost Illusions* journalism is heavily scrutinised, with the character of Claude Vignon declaring *‘A newspaper is not supposed to enlighten its readers, but to supply them with congenial opinions’*. Perhaps there is an atavistic pertinence backing the notion that newspapers are, by their very nature, biased. But what is the difference between bias and deceit. Bias is a more subtle art, a slow drip of support suspended in the nuanced report of events. Deceit is clumsy, obviously manipulative and based on this recent scandal: borderline desperate. It could be argued that this is a better model, simply because it is such a blatant attempt to mislead, if citizens were to read the actual article. *If citizens were to read the article*. A worrying conclusion. We know headlines can be deceptive but it’s easier to believe a headline than read an article. Especially when our political consumption is spread across multiple platforms, either dividing our time between soundbites of alternate sources or just simply driving our confirmation bias. The problem is that politics can’t be consumed in this manner, it requires reading the smaller lines, perhaps even between the lines. Twitter threads are frustratingly hit and miss. Faced with this scepticism, how do you then navigate between the endless mass of articles, an overwhelming prospect for someone with very little time on their hands. What do you trust? What is objective news? Do we even really covet the unbiased and uncontroversial in our political news, I would love to say yes. But the seeker of pure objective news will have their work cut out, perhaps even appear sanctimonious. For now these people are of a hopeful minority. 

As much as we love to criticise the media, we surely only have a limited capacity to criticise. This criticism is much better suited in the direction of the politicians and their political misdemeanours. Controversy shouldn’t surround the messenger but the politician giving the message. But if it all came down to it, could we even cope with a dull, impartial headline? Perhaps controversial headlines are simply a necessary ingredient for modern politics in the battle for our attention. Perhaps in the long run it's aiding our critical awareness so we can shield ourselves from manipulative practises. An optimistic outlook, and one that a few more deceitful headlines may nudge us towards. For now the bright side seems to be that a deceptive headline at least makes it a little clearer as to how we got here. Oh what a mess. 
