---
layout: post
title:  "Cultural Identity: a brief opinion of why Europe is less worse than you think"
date:   2019-10-01
categories: [politics]
---

Away from Amsterdam’s eclectic centre a silver-haired local is walking his young dog alongside the canal. He is dressed in Cargo shorts and an orange polo shirt, the warm evening has stretched on into the night. The canal water, more peaceful by night, seems oblivious to the fact that its Saturday evening in Amsterdam. The man acknowledges passers-by with fresh eyes and a gentle smile, no matter how familiar their gaze. He had lived along that canal most his adult life and yet his appreciation of its majesty has barely wavered. Before he returns to his home he takes a seat on a nearby bench, a pit stop on his evening routine; a moment of reflection before the young pup became irritable. The bench he decided to occupy on this particularly warm evening, was placed within a multicultural congregation of youthful students and travellers. People were radically different and some just different enough, and yet were sharing stories, and exchanging morals and imperfections without aggravation or insecurity. The local man sat within this brethren of youth soon joined in the conversation with both intrigue and insight. His locality made him outnumbered but this only made him more excited to converse, perhaps because he realised that the scene unfolding all around him was still undoubtedly Amsterdam, and his city had made all these people come together.

The EU is often depicted as a place where cultural identity is homogenising. Apparently even Greek siestas are becoming a thing of the past. Yet my experience journeying around Europe quashed this lazy generalization (although I can’t comment on siestas in Greece). This realization led me to believe that within Europe it may be easier to recognize cultural identity as an outsider rather than an insider. By this I mean it may be easier to identify what sets a place apart if you are merely visiting. Europe is still a place rich in cultural diversity. This diversification combined with obvious political integration makes journeying between destinations feel too easy, as if you’ve missed some bureaucratic step. Britain’s own level of cultural and political integration is far less developed than our continental neighbours, yet we ignore this defeated paradox of integration-differentiation within the EU. Perhaps this is because Britain’s very own differentiation and identity feels in a crisis. In such an existential panic it is natural for people to find a figure to blame. Step forward the EU. But having seen the EU states myself I could not comprehend the notion that there was causality between the EU and a significant loss of an individual state’s cultural identity. Perhaps instead it represents peoples inability (including myself) to recognise their country’s cultural identity, a tragedy that is wrongfully circumvented by the declaration it must instead be lost.

There is a difficulty in truly appreciating the individuality of your locality when you have nothing to truly compare it to, for an authentic comparison would require equal attachment to more than one locality. A great proportion of our identity clearly stems from not being a part of other identities. Mark Twain famously said that ‘comparison is the death of joy’, and while this is pertinent on a social level, there can be a satiating feeling to be gained from comparing one’s hometown to another. It helps put a finger on what it is that makes a place your place; So much of our minds depiction of a place’s identity stems from ‘they are them and we are us’ or ‘that is there and this is here’. Instead many people when they travel bolster Twain’s aphorism. They make half-hearted comments about ‘moving here’, or saying ‘the people are so much nicer here’, before feeling deflated when they return. Yet this is more a reflection of the shortness of their own time spent there, rather than an inherent problem with where they come from. A brief stay in a place can justify an inability to fully perceive a place’s cultural identity, and consequently remove the potential to understand our own backyard. The other side of this is that to live in a fixed location can, rather depressingly, sink you into a state of escapism. The banality of everyday living makes you covet the time when everything was exciting and new. You wish to purge yourself of these pernicious thoughts and fly away to some distant land. So the difficulty is finding a middle ground whereby we operate with perceptive exploration and a stronger conviction of what is home. The latter is a difficult trait, but is one I found in that particular Amsterdam local. It was no surprise he seemed so serene.

When you find yourself travelling around a new area with no particular purpose it is hard not to feel like a flaneur. It is hard not to compare European grandiosity to British monstrosity, particularly when you merely brush the surface of that particular European heavyweight. Naturally when your time in a place is so limited you gravitate towards the beautiful and the exuberant, you get stuck into what attracted you to that location in the first place. This can be the beauty of travelling in that it allows a filtered experience, a glossy sequence of cathartic events that even something so obtrusive such as a baby screaming on a train seems to be part of some larger detox. A usually churlish moment suddenly may be met with an unnerving amount of sympathy or even hopeless comedy. When you return home the beauty of your own surroundings may become more salient, or you at least begin to notice the uniqueness of the place. This would be the ideal sequence of events for our travels. But the passing of time, as it so often does, begins to numb such innocuous moments of sensitivity. They become unimportant, almost fatuous discoveries as we gradually return to the routine of our everyday lives. But in the context of Britain right now this is anything but unimportant; there is a deeply engrained belief that we must escape the cultural homogenisation of Europe. This is built upon the supposition that EU states have become happy to sacrifice their identity for further integrational benefits. All I can say in response to this would be for someone to go around European countries and ask citizens whether they would be willing to make such a sacrifice. A Unanimous no would likely be the answer. Of course some may say that they have already sacrificed a small fraction of their identity, but what does this actually mean considering cultural identity is a seemingly evolving phenomenon. Maybe they mean to compare the present state with a counterfactual of the country outside the EU. But this isn’t worth exploring partly because of its impossibility and partly because it is easy to tell what is Germany and what is Holland (Importantly that is based on the condition that they have visited Germany and Holland).

So what does this really have to do with Brexit? Brexit is about ‘taking back control’ and purging ourselves of the antiquated European Council, it’s about self-governance and a strengthening of democracy. The trouble is there is too much evidence that these justifiable motives mask over a less understandable position, that somehow the EU is quashing Britain’s identity. As a nation we are so insecure about it that we fail to notice the diversity among our European neighbours, which also represents a symptomatic failure to appreciate our own cultural identity. But our insecurity is not unique, throughout Europe there are stories of the same form of frustrations in not really understanding the place where we live. Despite not being fully aware of our own cultural identity, and finding it easier to identify others, it remains something we place a great deal of value on. A benefit of travel is that you become the outsider looking in, and it leaves you wondering why some locals fail to see what you see. That is, a place or country shaped by a unique set of random characteristics that form its identity. Nothing deterministic. Upon return to Britain I suddenly had a visceral appreciation of the distinctiveness of the place. I felt an outsider again for the briefest of moments before submerging into the arduous task of navigating Brexit and daily routine. It is a great shame that so many of us fail to see the true idiosyncrasies of a place with any permanency simply because we become used to it. An unexpected bonus of travel is found in this initial period of return, but it is an equally frustrating realisation that it won’t endure. As mentioned we too often associate Europe with a homogenising culture, but this is far from the truth. Instead the most powerful differentiation in cultural identity can be found in the visceral, stemming from a myriad of experiences, not just the aesthetic. It can therefore be difficult to identify with any clarity. Each state is thus just a little self-conscious and in turn feels it necessary to look to the past to answer the mysticism around their identity. Instead a better cure for their identity crisis may be to go out and travel and see what it is that they are not, or simply to engage with those around you who are escaping their own country.

Would more people have voted to remain if everyone had been travelling around Europe. Who knows. Brexit to people isn’t just about identity (apparently), there are seemingly endless economic and geopolitical contestations on the matter. All I can say from experience is that travelling may change people’s view on their belief about British identity and the effect the EU has on it. It is easier to identify an identity retrospectively. An example may be when someone says ‘look at those 1950’s Teddy Boys, that’s so English/British’. But the reality is this was only a substrata of London’s population reputationally inflated over the subsequent decades. What is it that people are trying to return to, what do they see as true British identity? We only associate posters of Teddy Boys and the like with archetypal figures of our culture because the subsequent decades have promoted them in that way. Instead of looking at history in this nostalgic, counterproductive way we should look back at the last 100 years of the country and recognise how much our culture has evolved, mutated or harmonised during this time period. Of course it is important to look at history to discover where we’ve come from and what we’ve learnt, but it rarely provides a blueprint for the present. National identity is not a fully static phenomenon. If the concern is instead that the EU is too heavily shaping this evolving identity then one only has to look abroad to see how this deduction would be wrong. People in Britain shape the immediacy of their surroundings more than Brussels can or probably will ever be able to. Brexit should be an argument over autonomy, not identity. Too often the latter dominates the former.

This has not been a rejection of citizens reasoning for Brexit. It is instead a rejection about basing reasoning on the unsubstantiated belief that we have lost our identity, as if the EU has intervened with Britain’s own cultural determinism. Britain’s identity crisis is instead a reflection that people have fallen into the two biases of 1) thinking retrospective identity isn’t easier to identify than present identity and 2) failing to notice that our identity partially stems from those differences we share with others. The latter of these biases can only be truly appreciated if you go out and spend time with locals in different cities or states or vice versa, rather than simply looking online or on TV. Whether Britain’s myth about its own identity and that of its European counterparts was responsible for Brexit is impossible to say. Perhaps it is instead something to be wary of. What this does give us is an excuse to travel and converse, and to do so without mingling the same perceptiveness with different aesthetics (the holiday resort syndrome), to instead travel with open eyes and a license to fully explore. Wandering around Europe provides a powerful sentiment: how could an entity seemingly so integrated, where your passport is largely redundant, provide such a diverse landscape of place and people. This is because people greatly value their cultural identity even if they find it to be ineffable. Finding a local who not only appreciated this achievement but thrived of it, was revelatory.

The communion between an identifiable place and an ever-changing community is something that Britain is either desperate to avoid or indifferent towards, yet the scene that the Dutch man had stumbled upon was a metaphor for what Europe should be. Here was a local who thrived off the vivacity of those who treated his home like a castle, who told him how beautiful the canal was at night and how friendly the locals were. Here was the rarity of someone utterly content in understanding where he lived and what a waste it would be if it couldn’t be shared. Of course the city and the people change around him, but to him it is still undoubtedly his home city of Amsterdam. This miracle of Europe is right on our doorstep, it appears a shame to turn our back on it. Unfortunately the importance of this miracle has been shunted aside by the verbosity of economic and geopolitical argument. Who knows what happens next. All that can be said is that the bidirectional loss is not evenly felt. In the words of the affable Dutch gentleman “it is sad and confusing, but it is not our problem. It is yours”.