---
layout: post
title:  "On the therapy of Nature (medium)"
date:   2020-11-18
categories: [philosophy, travel]
---

This article was published on medium <a href="https://seblawson11.medium.com/the-therapy-of-nature-e504ac2dcf74 ">here</a>

The story goes that if you are a rocket scientist at a party then you will attract insurmountable attention from those around you. Guests will gravitate towards you, toasting to your noble profession with uncharacteristic and slightly unnerving sincerity. Alternatively, if you are a call-centre worker then people may awkwardly provide a polite enthusiasm with their voice, whilst their face remains frozen from the panic-inducing reality at being stuck in conversation with no work-related questions to ask (of course we should ideally live in a world where people are not defined by their job title but we are unfortunately yet to make this mature transition). Now if you were to take those two individuals and place them in the natural world you will get a very different response. Well in fact you get no response at all because nature doesn’t care. The call-centre worker becomes a human and the rocket scientist becomes a human; both people may be genuinely interesting or uninteresting to the other person, but to nature the whims and idiosyncrasies of both individuals are an irrelevance. We will not be probed on that for which society places great importance.

It is perversely refreshing to know that everyone has a place in this world simply because nature doesn’t care about you. On the surface this may sound slightly paradoxical because in society if something doesn’t care about our existence it is usually a trigger for internal concern as we often translate it that something is fundamentally wrong with us - maybe we begin to over-inflate our loneliness or begin to glue ourself to the metaphor that we are a small cog in a giant industrial machine. The pleasing thing about nature not caring is that it isn’t a choice, nature doesn’t discriminate. It simply is. It doesn’t see the charismatic rocket scientist and bask them in sunshine or blossom its flowers upon arrival, whilst the surly call-centre worker gets branch after branch blowing into their face down the boulevard. Nature is, by its very definition, indifferent to what we consider important in our everyday lives - it has no social intention, it has no motive. Because of this it cannot be seduced by all that prevents and distorts happiness in our socially-embedded lives away from nature. As John Gray puts it "it is only because nature cares nothing for us that it can release us from human cares". On the other end of the scale any sense of achievement we feel deserves celebration isn’t going to be acknowledged let alone appreciated by nature. Flowers cannot conceive of thought let alone a concern for the vagaries of our lives; only their presence can help trivialise our deeper troubles. Trees cannot experience schadenfreude (experiencing pleasure from others misfortune) or mitfreude (being happy when others discover happiness), they can only help us as we attempt iron out our own destructive thoughts. In circumstances of hubris or no hubris nature can provide a uniquely cathartic experience for the rocket scientist or the call-centre worker or the anxious or the ecstatic. The effect of time spent in nature is an asymmetric tendency towards remediation rather than suffering. Nature can rejuvenate, it can humble, but it can never judge.

Would we be more inclined to honesty if we had a therapist who never judged?

So long as the ability to surround ourselves with nature exists humans will always have a tonic for suffering, we may even feel free to take more risks because because this liberating corner of our world doesn’t care if we completely fail. We can always alleviate the importance of a failure or success by spending a few days in the mountains. What this presents is a somewhat absurdist mindset upon return to ‘civilisation’, the idea that some of what we previously considered important seems suddenly ridiculous. Most of our value system may lose its significance, it has been through a necessary refinement. Those values that survive natures filter grow in their importance and what is now kernel to our lives may become a little clearer – it may be finding a more robust conduit for happiness, building healthy relationships or simply finding something to do with our life that we can extract some non-pecuniary benefit from. The Stoics encouraged rich people anxious about losing their fortune to spend time living as dog, a useful exercise to prove they could still survive as a penniless person. What stoicism deemed an appropriate solution for financial anxiety, draws a parallel to the simple therapy that time spent in nature provides for our most pernicious sources of anxiety. Everyone should spend time in nature simply because we live in a world where people spend a lot of money trying to relieve stress and anxiety. Nature is largely free and is perhaps the most effective and simply therapy not just for the troubles of modernity but for the troubles of being a human. Standing in a dusty valley squeezed by rugged unperturbed mountains, or simply sitting on a park bench watching the autumn leaves fall can make us feel utterly insignificant. Yet without the toxic intention or social self-infliction behind it this feeling is liberating not isolating. In that moment of cathartic stillness we may notice how in society we champion so much and appreciate so little. This lesson is in our parks and our gardens not just our mountains and lakes, we simply have to give it more of our own neglected attention. We should learn to use nature without scarring it, it is in all of our best interests.

Many of our modern problems are rooted in an inability to escape time, nature helps us escape time.
