---
layout: post
title:  "Seneca And Don't Judge a Person By Their Cover (Job)"
date:   2020-01-11
categories: [philosophy]
---


<blockquote> “Each man has a character of his own choosing; it is chance or fate that decides his choice of job.” - Seneca </blockquote>

Seneca, whilst he is talking contextually about slaves, is determined to judge those individuals by the nature of their character and not by their occupation. While determinism in career may no longer be as readily apparent in the western world, there is still a lot to be gained from what Seneca has to say here. The notion that each of us can influence our own character is paramount. We, for the most part, are in charge of how we behave, and at our disposal we have the abilities to control our emotions; we cannot, for example, blame our outward expression of anger on others. There are of course outliers such as a psychopath whose tough childhood, through little fault of their own, may have rendered their mind in shutdown and their character therefore immutably troubled. However when it comes to occupational achievement a lot of this is down to circumstance and randomness. It is a harmful trend to pretend success in work is entirely meritocratic and thus believe it a good metric to assume a noble profession means they are a noble person. We are missing out on unravelling what really makes a person interesting - the set of emotional qualities and memories that form their character. 

Many people these days feel a little anxious about the kind of job they will end up taking, as if it is an unavoidable reflection of their character. This is partially because we fall too often into the trap Seneca urges us to avoid - We attach identity too firmly to occupation, and this puts enormous pressure on those individuals entering the job market for the first time. No wonder young people feel an overwhelming sense of anxiety over getting a job, this is not often anxiety over the process (which can be incredibly frustrating) but for the choice of job we apply for. If you go and work for a bank then you become an archetypal banker whose identity is attached to the post-financial crisis crucifixion of morally misaligned bankers. If you become a lawyer then you suddenly are someone who loves paperwork and probably won’t want to talk about impressionist art. If you’re an accountant people may deem you not worth talking to full stop. All this does is add an unnecessary source of anxiety for young people today who feel that getting a job will redefine them and put them into a bracket they may not be entirely comfortable with. If you don’t get a societally deemed good job, and then if you don’t soon get promoted, you are invariably a failure amongst your peers and a failure of the educational system. Rather than find a new set of peers it is instead our duty to show them that we represent a far richer tapestry than our job description. 
	
 Instead of asking people what their job is, perhaps we should instead be asking what type of person they are. Or what they are trying to change about themselves, or what emotional quality they feel they have cultivated from experience. We love to categorise people as it helps us discern who people are through the mystique of the individual identity. How we frame someone’s character or decision-making can be a lot more sympathetic if we attach it to the person themselves rather than attaching it to their job. The reason being is that we can never truly know another individual and all their complexities, but the more honest people are and the more focus we place on working out who we all are can make us realise how similar some of our emotional tendencies are whilst are experiences are so very different. We need to rid ourselves of the heuristic that by learning what someone does for a living means we know who they are. The best we can do to understand another person is by realising everyone is a bit anxious about something, everyone is a bit lost and no one really knows what they are doing. By this you are likely to find a greater degree of communion with those around you rather than through the more menial task of attaching personality to profession. Just because someone has a job and says they enjoy it doesn’t mean they have it all figured out, they may in fact be praying you don’t ask them why because they don’t have an answer other than its an easier reply than the contrary. People are so much more than their business card and the moment this is realised the less pressure people will be under when finding employment. This is not to say people shouldn't be ambitious when entering the job market, but rather realise that not every accountant is the same and thus each accountant has something unique to offer to both the workplace and those around them. If anything this is an inspiring thought. 


<blockquote>“To be yourself in a world that is constantly trying to make you something else is the greatest accomplishment” – Ralph Waldo Emerson</blockquote> 
