---
layout: post
title:  "On building holistic cities (unfinished)"
date:   2020-10-30
categories: [technology, economics]
---

Those on the defensive about modern architecture and city design often label their work as being ‘the modern way’. Those that deny this are therefore outdated and nostalgic beings living in the romanticism of yesteryear. This is often a tactic in politics among other fields and is, for want of a better word, complete nonsense. Progress is not linear, and change is not always necessary. Yet we need to change the way we build cities and this does not need to be generated a completing new epoch for the life of the city. We can dip into the past, see what worked, determine whether it will work at modern scale and couple this with new technology to build and adapt cities in non-linear and subtler way rather than through patchworks and mass demolition jobs. 
	Given how many people will soon be living in cities (~6 billion in 2045) it is imperative that we may have some centralised planning rather than leaving their design to the sporadic competition of the marketplace. Each city needs a collective vision, they need to be built holistically by the people who live there. Cities are a fine example of a complex system, one in which is entirely of the human creation. What makes a system complex is that things behave differently at different scales. So designing a city for 5-10 million people should not be mimicked from a city design fit for 250 thousand people. This is something that locals will tell you rather than some third-party planner building models from the other side of the world.
Modern technology and engineering should be making our buildings cheaper to build and of better quality. We should be able to innovate the functionality of buildings and public spaces without losing any of the beauty and community that older cities emphasise.
One can learn a lot from the layout of an old city but as we have seen, the way they are constructed doesn’t necessarily scale properly, but the core principles do. For example having community-driven focal points and public squares should be in every city. 
In 1487 Leonardo Da Vinci proposed the design for a new city that intertwined the promotion of citizen health and the need for beauty. This comes through both engineering and art. During the Italian Renaissance the idea of creating a utopian city was a popular topic amongst Leonardo’s peers. While this may lead to impracticality there is an idea from this we should start to rekindle, the idea of thinking about cities as a whole, a living organism that requires thought before change. Modern technology can help to manage the inputs and outputs of this complex system, but it requires human beings to understand what else they want from a city. 
In modern cities people also deserve beauty to be more evenly distributed, and the first step to doing so is to accept there is no false dichotomy between beauty and functionality. Aesthetics matter and in combination with intelligent, functional design an urban environment can show the best of art and science. Renaissance Italy appreciated aesthetics and their towns now stand as monuments of beauty. If anything it shows a care for the needs of those who live and visit the area. Again, this requires local-input. 
A common them from the following principles I discuss is that for each there is some Aristotelian balance to find, the solution is rarely found at either extreme. We require wisdom to build cities that are more hopeful, communal and less wasteful in all aspects; the eight principles below house some of criteria we need to get right in the 21st century. 

2.1 Ordered and Scalable Layout  

Cities should attempt to bring some order to a world we do not fully understand. 

	The problem with many cities is that they have become too big in too short a period of time, leaving random and unstructured layouts. The existing network infrastructure has become overburdened as cities have sprawled.  When we say a place is overcrowded we mean it is too difficult to move around, rather than we have too many neighbours. If we were to design a city from scratch then we might put in a clause that the population cannot exceed is the number of people the city is built for, perhaps with a buffer of up to 5% more that varies with desired population. 
Some element of symmetry are important not just for navigation but for a general sense that the each street has been built as part of a bigger city and not just for its own creation. The problem with many cities is that they have become too big in too short a period of time. ‘Sprawl’ is a word no city who hopes to keep itself in order wants to hear. Many cities have existing network infrastructure that has become overburdened by their rapid population growth. Many cities are simply not built to scale. When we build a city the centre should not be the focal point. We need focal points that circulate a central sphere of the city (think of the circle line in London). From this rather than having zones oscillating from the centre should instead have villages that tessellate in and ordered structure. The challenge is in finding right balance between feeling a part of local community but also a part of the city at large. That is why there should be distinctive similarities between villages as well as sufficient access to more focal places. 
	As humans we desire some element of order for our minds to remain at ease, we do not want a randomly generated city as this will scramble the mind. We would also like to be able to make our way round the city and not easily loose our sense of direction, we would like to feel that those who helped build the city gave some thought to the convenience of its layout. 
	To alleviate the problem of sprawl it is also necessary to build urban environments as compact places.
As mentioned earlier uncontrolled sprawl can be the death of a city. The best streets of a city are those that are intimate, where space feels precious and cars do not dominate and views are not completely obscured by high-rise buildings but instead houses have been pressed against one another whilst the street in front allows them space to move freely and converse.
	Any tourist will know that walking around a city is the best way to know the place and be immersed in its culture. A city that is stretched out is one where you have to rely on transport to get anywhere, and it all feels disconnected. There may well be pockets that are vibrant but if the rest of the city is a labyrinthine of roads and vast warehouses then those pockets will become overcrowded and overburdened. You want beauty and order to be evenly distributed, you want tourists to feel they can walk down any street and they will find the spirit of the city’s life. 
A city that values space both vertically and laterally is one that considers its inhabitants quality of life. A city needs to place an immensely high value on space. A city that allows itself to sprawl, that keeps adding individual projects here and there, with no thought to the holistic network will suffer the consequences over the forthcoming decades. Ancient cities have survived for so long because they are compact. No one could say they have wasted the space and come in with bulldozers. Fortunately we don’t have to build cities compact to help defend it from invading armies, we should instead do so to benefit the creative and social lives of the people that live there. 


2.2 Locally-orientated design

The impact of urban architecture is its most powerful when it feels part of some collective identity. Houses on their own in the wild can be more individually constructed, architects can make bolder attempts to autograph their work with the hope that it maximise the benefits of living in the wild such as through floor to ceiling windows. However in an urban environment the architect needs to consider a wider array of parameters. 
Amsterdam is a fine example of the balance between a shared architectural style as well as an avoidance of characterless buildings that mimic their neighbours. One of the great tragedies of modern suburban housing projects is that each house looks the same, it is purely functional as if an immutable design template is used for small, medium and large houses. This is nothing other than a denial of the unique characters that will live there and a lack of desire to couple functionality with beauty. We crave some level of complexity in an urban environment, not too much otherwise our minds become restless as we cannot identify any kind of pattern, but enough to allow our minds to remain interested by its surroundings. This is where Amsterdam provides a blueprint. Alongside the canals are positioned slender, rather tall houses that provide an immediate geographical association. But each building also has a character of its own; one may be painted a bold next door to a conservative beige, or have concave roof whilst its neighbours have more triangular versions. These neighbourhoods are a perfect example of how we might aesthetically build a place of shared identity whilst also promoting self-expression, qualities we hope to find manifest in the people who live there. 
Another factor to consider is what it is that makes a place look archetypally London or Rome. Is it simply the fact that we have been fed images of what a London street traditionally looks like that makes us associate it with the capital of the United Kingdom. If this is true then we have a challenge in building a city from scratch. We do not want a city of glass cubes. To overcome this obstacle we need inspiration from both the local geography and the people (or culture). In Jerusalem for example, buildings must be faced with local stone. It is hard to associate with a city of glass, no matter how tall the skyscrapers. When we visit a city we want some signal to inform us that the city is unique, it has some shared expression that only reflects this place we our visiting. For the locals we are looking for a reflection of ourselves in the architecture, some collective attempt to solidify the identity of its citizens, without being a city of cloned buildings. 
A lot of modern urban development’s tend be at either extreme. They either are loud and audacious but do not fit in with the surroundings or they are soviet-style projects where there is no attempt to provide individual idiosyncrasy to shared identity. 



2.3 Pedestrianize Transport

	From the perspective of the inhabitant or tourist the greatest problem for modern cities to address is that of transport. This is also one of the benefits of smaller urban environments because traffic is less of a burden for the town or small city, the problems of transport do not simply scale up or down proportionately. Transport is a complex system, as discussed earlier this means it behaves differently at different scales. 
	The transport problem is difficult to alleviate when it already exists because to rearrange would require a network shutdown and would put the city or town to sleep. Many cities are simply not designed for cars and buses because the road networks were established before their invention. Nor would we want our cities designed for private transport, at least on the surface. Many call the idea of building tunnels under a city crazy and yet it is precisely this kind of radical shift that is required for traffic-heavy cities to be considered liveable. If we were to build a new urban system would we rather have a well-connected, reliable tram network on the surface and not have to constantly suffer from the anxiety of crossing a car heavy road, or would we want 12-laned roads sprawled over the city surface whilst the public are forced to bury themselves in the underground public transport network. An urban environment that prioritises its citizens would find a way to readjust this balance between public and private transport. 
	The point of this reconsideration is to have fewer roads dedicated to cars, less of the precious space of the city dedicated to their privacy. A solution should be found to fitting in the need for private transport around a publicly-orientated design, rather than allowing private transport to dominate urban design. Trams and bike lanes should be separate from car lanes. The city should be dominated by streets where people can walk around freely where the only transport they should be weary of is the occasional gentle rattle of a tram or a slender bike lane. Perhaps it would be different if cars were all electric as then they would be less obtrusive from both a noise and air quality perspective. However we still need large parts of the city purely dedicated to citizens walking around. The 15 minute city idea being ambitiously put forward by Parisian authorities is the logical way to accommodate this shift in the use of transport.


(put in section above)
	Surely the point of living close to others is to benefit from their company, which is why the privacy of some urban housing is a strange phenomenon, even if it is simply inhabited to be close to work or schools. One area where this situation can be reconciled is in the use of public spaces. Those who enjoy greater privacy around their own homes may still feel part of a community through their use of these non-exclusive places. These manifest themselves most impressively in the public squares. 
	Many European cities seem to get this right. They are not too big or not too small and they do not let vehicles intersect. A public place is at its most effective when pedestrianised, the atmosphere is always a little on edge if vehicles can suddenly bypass. 
	We need to get better at buildings squares, not too big, not too small. Public places where people converge to eat and drink, meet new people and explore new elements of the city’s culture. We need these places to symbolise the benefits of the city and this can only be done with pedestrianised places where citizens can gather. These should not be rare, but frequent. 

2.4 Use Technology 

Many modern flats are thought of as a bad investment because of their poor building quality and their lifeless appearance. Technology should at the least ensure the former is not true. It is the role of new technology to improve that which you often cannot see but is essential to make a building practical. Technology is at its best when replacing old technology. 
Unfortunately it appears our throwaway culture is gently creeping into disposable housing. Build them cheap and when they start to fall down leave that to the owners or tenants. In a few decades time we can replace the whole block. Technology should instead be making sure buildings are more energy efficient, practical and robust. 
A good example of what technology is best at is the Tesla solar roof tiles. They replace a technological benefit that fell foul to poor aesthetics – the solar panel. They are also more pleasant to look at than the smooth-faced protrusion of solar panels. Having a roof tile that looks exactly like a roof tile but capable of storing solar energy is exactly what technology should be doing. The tiles also are more robust than normal tiles, again another bonus. 
Technology should be charged with ensuring that the things we know to be good for us exist but are also that which are not necessary to put on display. Insulation being a prime example. Technology should be working as a solution to many of our problems with urban areas, the one problem it cannot solve is that of aesthetics. Or in other words technology can contribute to both structural integrity and utility in the Vitruvian triad, but not to beauty. 
Unfortunately it has creeped too much into aesthetics. Technology can help in the design and construction process but it should stay clear of aesthetics. However impressive a tall glass building may be, it is not beautiful. To leave aesthetics to technologists would be to remove complexity, we need the artists in communion with the local identity to provide buildings rich in detail and beauty, but also imperfect. That way they become a reflection of ourselves and nature, providing an element of peace in all the richness. 
	Technology is the ultimate problem solver for cities, it is how cities can not only be beautiful but can also be smart. Cities of the future should synthesise the two. Technology can help us solve air quality, water problems and its ability to cope with changes in weather. We should be using technology to divert the flow of traffic underground perhaps, to find a solution for the conflict between the desire for a largely pedestrianised city and the necessity of transporting goods. 


2.5 Think about collective aesthetics 
Conflict of interests between the developers and the locals – ultimately it is the locals who live there so they might not want an almightily tall block of flats ruining their view even if it makes economic sense to the developer. People care about aesthetics, it is developers who have ignored this. They want aesthetics that remind them that they are part of a community as well as part of a place. 
There is a principal agent problem where developers who have never familiarised themselves with the opinion of locals. They disregard aesthetics in favour of the bold and the brash or its antithesis the timid and sullen. The latter of which is purely functional, the former purely for show with no consideration to the people who may walk past it every day. Every person has a sense of aesthetics and feels more comfortable and perhaps more productive and emotionally robust in high quality architecture. 
Andrea Palladio the Italian renaissance architect believed architecture can make us better people, that is its purpose. It is hard for a developer to comprehend this, this is why urban development’s cannot be made purely on functionality and economics. We need aesthetics to bring about calm, harmony and dignity (Palladio). Buildings must fit with one another. A street littered with advertising boards from multinational corporations cannot help but distract the eye and confuse the brain, that is their entire purpose – it is hard to feel any sense of calm in such an environment when aesthetics are entirely built around your psychological vulnerabilities. Instead when there is too much hitting our eyes, all of which being out of sync with one another we can’t help but feel anxious. Subjecting architecture to the whims of the marketplace is destined to fail. There must be some political will to ensure local agency is present in the development process. It is no surprise that the beautiful ancient towns that tourists flock to where built in partnership with the people that lived there (give examples and check).
As the great John Ruskin said “all good architecture is the expression of national life and character; and it is produced by a prevalent and eager national taste, or desire for beauty”, we can apply this at both the national and local level. Beauty is earnt through an appreciation for humans deeper psychological needs. 



2.6 Focal points of beauty and purpose
Limiting architecture to pure functionality is a unrequired trade-off a building can be both beautiful and functional – that is not unreasonable to assume. Yet it appears urban architecture has sacrificed any attempt at aesthetics in the name of functionality. If a street can house homes and shops then what is the harm – well the harm is on those who walk down those streets or live in those homes. If developers build purely functional architecture with no thought but to do so cheaply and without aesthetic consideration then what should the people who live there think. Again, people like to see the better side of themselves in buildings and miserable looking buildings are more likely to invoke misery. 
	The problem we have with beauty is that it is to entangled in the objective/subjective dichotomy whereby the trend is that beauty is in the eye of the beholder, it is purely subjective. This has done nothing but harm architectural practise, giving reign to constructions that give no bearing to the place or to the preferences of humans. Building whatever is the most seemingly complex structure does not guarantee beauty. Nor is beauty necessarily objective, not all buildings will be described as beautiful in their entirety, the objectivity comes from certain qualities we like to see materialised in the building. Example…. (school of life order etc) Unfortunately when we debate the notion of beauty we obsess with the whole which means the objective side can never hope to win that debate. 
This ties in to the framework of having similar themed buildings that all look slightly different. But within this framework we need buildings that stand alone, not obtrusive but inspire intrigue and majesty. Previous civilisations got this right with temples and churches, which we still flock to in our masses because of the seemingly objective beauty of their construction. This is where the fusion between art and science can be at its most playful. Some modern projects tend to tilt too far towards what is possible scientifically with no consideration as to the aesthetic appeal, as if the quality of engineering can someone leverage the lack of qualities it looks to inspire, as if beauty itself has no value in a world of limitless functionality.  
	Of course the purpose of the buildings themselves is as important. Designing a city in the west now would unlikely see the need to put churches at their epicentre. But the reasoning behind this is what we should adapt to the times. A communal place of worship could be replaced in a Kantian idea (see enlightenment/De Botton on culture replacing scriputure) by culture. Or perhaps what we like about churches is their serenity, which in a loud world seems ever more appealing. What if there was a place at the heart of our communities where we could momentarily shut ourselves off from the urban buzz, we may not necessarily be at prayer but we may equally find ourselves at peace. We need places at the heart of our communities that consider our deepest needs as both individuals and as a collective.


2.7 Use Nature

Sometimes a city can be a little overwhelming; the noise, the crowds, the distractions and temptations. To alleviate some of our urban anxiety we should ensure there is sufficient space for nature in and around the concrete jungle. The difficulty is how to organise its distribution. 
	People use the term reconnect with nature rather than connect with nature which for the eternal city dweller suggests there is some anthropological significance of nature, which be forgotten in our urban lives. Most of us know the benefits of nature, the benefits of spending time with something so indifferent to our existence is strangely comforting. Cities can at points feel claustrophobic and overwhelming. We need regular pockets of nature embedded with the feel of a city. The division between park and pure urbanism is popular among cities but we need to give more consideration to a more embedded version of the relationship. 
Singapore have built ‘vertical forest’ and there is something tropical about their design which makes them look like they belong to a Singaporean identity. This design therefore doesn’t necessarily replicate globally. The idea of it yes, but the exact design that encapsulates the ideas of a greener city, not necessarily. Each city must be entrusted with balancing the need to provide more elements of nature alongside the nuances and complexity of the place. This all comes back to a people-orientated design tying in the past and the present to build a better future. 
Need rivers not just for providing moments of calm but to further separate transport from walkways.


2.8 Mystery 
	City’s should be their own form of adventure. While a well organised layout is essential for general orientation, designers shouldn’t be afraid to add an element of mystery in its layout. 
	In Vienna the classical centre (give example) is a hotspot for tourists who flock the streets on their way to museums or designer clothes shops. Yet with a hint of local knowledge you can sneak down a couple of seemingly invisible streets and find yourself in a quiet, less imperious part of the city centre where streets are empty and littered with quant café’s and understated shops. The point is not that one is better than the other but that a city sometimes needs a Diagon Alley to remind us that our lives and our cities need not be entirely functional. Our cities like our lives can be playful without being in disarray. 
	The natural world is full of such places, when we build cities we can attempt to embed the quirks into a more ordered but equally curious world. We can also use cities to manifest of the pockets of our mind that remain mysterious and elusive.  Again, it is the balance between order and complexity that stands at the crux of good urban design. 

think of a glass skyscraper that you often find in London. They skeletal in that you can peer into the inside, you can picture yourself admidst the rather grey interior. Now imagine the stone skyscrapers of new York and their poststamp windows. They house far greater mystery about what goes on inside. This is fuel for our minds imagination, in other words we can never get bored walking amongst these mysterious towers we may be inspired by our own projection of what the skeleton looks like. 


Conclusion
	Of course there will be additional variables that we ought to consider but the purpose of these 8 principles is that without giving each of them individual thought as to how they can collectively elevate the experience of the city or town then the residents and visitors will inevitably suffer.

Ultimately cant rely exclusively on models for design of city without spending time trying to understand how cities actually work (pg. 50 mental models book) – can go wrong when try to fit complexity into simplification. 
