---
layout: post
title:  "On the importance of introspection: through the Prologue of Hesse's Demian"
date:   2020-03-01
categories: [philosophy, literature]
---


The beautiful and acutely accurate introspection of the youthful mind is no more apparent than in the page and a half of text that constitute the prologue of Herman Hesse’s Demian. Written in first person it promotes the rare thing that people spend so little time on: spiritual self-reflection, whereby we give ourselves permission to ask the most important questions about ourselves fully aware that we might not have the answers, simply because they operate in a realm of our subconscious that we can never truly understand. Yet the elegance with which Hesse writes makes this a problem not worth considering because he sees the value in the process of exploring who we are, fully aware that we may never have a satisfactory answer. We must dare to look inward, because no one else can do it for us, and hence in such attempt we will discover something that no one else could – because they are they and you are you. No one can better undestand us better than ourselves, you have no greater case study for what it means to be alive, and what it means to be a human being than yourself. 

<blockquote>Each individual, who is himself an experimental throw from the depths, strives towards his own goal. We can understand each other; but each person is able to interpret himself to himself alone. </blockquote>

This realisation that no one can ever fully understand us can leave us feeling almightily alone, it can even put a dampener on the romantic inclination that out there in the world exists a soulmate who will understand us fully. No such person exists, we are all in the best position to interpret ourselves. 

<blockquote>My story is more important to me than any poet’s story to him, for it is my own – and it is the story of a human being – not an invented, idealised person but a real, live, unique being. </blockquote>

Valuing our own lives is perhaps more relevant now than ever before given the incessant trend in the modern world of fixating our attention on the lives of others whom we have never met nor are likely to ever meet. Perhaps we our scared to reverse our attenion onto ourselves. But as the next passages allude to that really is all part of the fun, and is what it really means to be a human. We are all composing our own story and yet so many of us refuse to embrace the uniqueness of such a story because we focus too stringently on what it is we share with one another. Of course we shouldn’t neglect the shared narratives of others as this is healthy for our sense community and empathy, but we shouldn’t also neglect the side of us that realises we are also a bit alone through the fact that we are all paving a new path, one in which no one will ever follow. We must be more selective over how we indulge in others, and start designating time to looking inwardly. Curiosity of the self should keep us returning to the treasure hunt of life itself.  

<blockquote>Every man is not only himself but; he is also the unique, particular, always insignificant and remarkable point where the phenomena of the world intersect once and for all and never again.  That is why every man’s story is important, eternal and sacred; and why every man while he lives and fulfils the will of nature is a wonderful creature, deserving the utmost attention. In each individual the spirit is made flesh, in each one of the whole of creation suffers, in each one a saviour is crucified. </blockquote>

<blockquote>The life of every man is a way to himself, an attempt at a way, the suggestion of a path. No man has ever been utterly himself, yet every man strives to be so, the dull, the intelligent, each one as best he can. </blockquote>

The immortalised final lines of William Ernest Henley’s Invictus alludes to we are all in charge of our inner journey and our fate. This is half true. As Boethius made clear we cannot hope to control our fate which relies so heavily on forces outside our control, and yet we are all the ‘the captain of our soul’. It is rather remarkable that Hesse could persuade you of not just the important of introspection, but the necessity of it for living in just a few hundred words. 'Who am I?' is the most important question we can try to answer, we may never have a satiating answer but the attempt to do so is enough to persuade us how lucky we are to try to answer it, it is an acknowledgement of conscious life itself and all peculiarities that come with it. No one appreciates the importance of this attempted discovery better than Hesse. The prologue of Demian is just an example of his emphasis on the inward journey. 
