---
layout: post
title:  "thoughts on the madness/trying to stay calm"
date:   2020-03-28
categories: [philosophy]
---

<h2>The Past</h2>

When the present is so feverishly disturbed by future uncertainty our proclivity is to turn to the past. We do so out of consolation. We seek solace in the darkest of all human narratives, the bleakest of which seem utterly fictitious in our world of ‘civility’. But when such a phenomena interrupts our most refined and rigorously routine lives we can’t quite comprehend the reality, because who would really envisage such circumstance in their own lives, who would look upon the future with such a canvas of despair. We delve into the past in the hope of finding an event as equally unknown, as equally absurd and as equally terrifying to ease our most troubled imagination. We seek distraction in the consolations of the past. We might even be hoping for some relic of hope, to ease the rather anxious self-perpetuating nightmare we find ourselves in. 

History is full of the most violent and nefarious acts radiating from a melting pot of sadists and sociopaths. One only has to look at the 20th century to see how ubiquitous they are in human history. Throughout the history of civilisation the quest for peace and order has often been entirely hypocritical. History has also witnessed the most seemingly cruel mutations in nature transferred from rodents, mammals and insects, and yet thus far, humanity has endured. We take comfort in the knowledge that we can read of a time when all that humans had strived towards had been thrown into cascading meltdown, and we can do so from the comfort of an armchair, perhaps with a mug of particularly tasteful Colombian coffee. For all the troubles of modernity, it could perhaps, be worse. 

European cities were bombarded to desolation during World War Two, a wreck of their former self and yet now they stand as cultural monuments. Decades later and one can eat fresh cinnamon rolls in Berlin, or enter an Art Gallery in London for free to ponder a fine collection of impressionist Art. We can gaze upon Monet’s Lily Pond and find ourselves teleported to the peace of yesteryear, perhaps to remind ourselves that within the seemingly dark narrative of history there were also ample opportunities to gaze at a noticeably picturesque pond in our garden. The past provides new opportunities in how we look at the world and ourselves, in the bleakest of moments we may perhaps find new ways to live. It also reminds us that as a collective we find a way to move on rather quickly from the darkest of times. 

<h2>The unknown</h2>

For all the value to be gained in looking to the past it unfortunately remains precisely incorrect to assume that all will be ok because of it. We cannot predict the future any more than those, who on the cusp of a new millennia in 1899, could have predicted what was to happen over the next few decades. It is likely their vision for the age would have been filled with a brighter landscape with less world wars, less financial meltdown and less political contention. What the past teaches us is that we should turn our attention more enthusiastically to the present, not just in times of hardship but also when everything seems to be going rather well. 

In times of trouble the past is not the only source of consolation nor is it necessarily the most effective. Yet many of us would happily delve into anecdotes of the past rather than into the depths of our mind in the present. With uncertainty over the future we can be comforted by the peace of the past when we don’t know how to find it in the present. We may religiously follow the news, determined to stay on top of the particularities of an ever-evolving problem, rather than be grateful of the time we may have needed to pause and reflect, to check-in with ourselves, perhaps even to realign our ambition. When the unknown is so heavily signposted we can be misguided into thinking that normality brings with it a clairvoyance of the mind. Life is never truly normal and we cannot be fully reassured about the future. We are always heading into the unknown.

As Camus’s novel “The Plague” tells us, there is no injustice of such an outbreak, the plague is within all of us and its manifestation does not discriminate. With Lady Fortuna we are presented with circumstances beyond are control, in our pursuit of something outside of ourselves it is inevitable that along the way we will be interrupted by some unpredictable event. This is, alas, one of those events.  When such circumstance arise we do not therefore need to spend our time asking why me or to turn our anger at the inhumanity into vitriolic action, instead we have the time to turn our attention onto what we truly have controls over. This may be of better use to those around us, and of better use to our own mental state than gluing our eyes to the news and looking for someone to blame. For the majority of us not directly involved in the societal response we can instead treat it as an exercise of self-discovery rather than finger pointing. We may from this discover Boethius’s teaching that to solely live through the vagaries of fortune is to set ourselves up for unhappiness. 

It is immensely humbling of nature to disrupt all our best laid plans that were concocted to perfection in our minds, but what it cannot do is take from us our experience in this very room at this very moment. An anxious news-induced gloom over what the future may however cloud our present. We feel we need to adjust our future goals and this consumes our thoughts. Ultimately, our mind is still dominated by what the future may bring us. As the philosopher John Gray notes thinkers have often struggled over the question of why should our future goals matter more than those we have now? Perhaps an uncertain future is a perfect opportunity to give some much needed nourishment to our present state of mind, and the resources we have at our disposal. As Gray concludes in “Straw Animals” why can’t we just see. 


<h2>Fear</h2>

Instead when our optimism and all our goals for the future receive a heavy blow it can often be replaced by fear. According the cheerfully unpretentious philosopher Montaigne “he who fears he shall suffer, already suffers what he fears”. Bear in mind this is not a quote from an ivory tower academic, merely blue-sky thinking from the impenetrable stubbornness of intellectual youth. This was a man reflecting on a life where he had suffered a great deal: he lost his best friend La Boetie at a tender age, he lost 5 of his 6 children shortly after birth and he experienced great physical pain in his later life from kidney stones. If anyone could teach us about fear and suffering it is Montaigne. When looking back on his life he concluded that “there were many terrible things in my life and most of them never happened”. This is not to deny the existence of bad things happening, but rather to accept their inevitability and not to let our mind be consumed by their manifestation. It is not a surprise therefore that Montaigne, like Seneca, was an advocate of becoming more sensitive to the most seemingly ordinary things in life because this is how we might cultivate a mindset to withstand hardship. In times of great uncertainty we must learn to take such comforts in the fortunes of the present, to sensitise ourselves to what is so often deemed ordinary and not worthy of our attention. We may in the process find the exact opposite is true. 

We cannot necessarily learn not to live without fear but we can learn to live with a more saturated version of the present. We must learn to extract emotional value from the present that does not stem from anticipation or expectation, to do so is to hedge ourselves against the unpredictability of the future. What we can learn from the virus is that devoting more attention to the here and now allows us to approach the future with a more robust psychological framework. Acute reflections on the present are less imperilled by unpredictable events. We can approach fear and the unknown with greater confidence knowing that we have, at our disposal, the tools required to live life intensely even in the most dire, restrictive circumstances. Our fear of the future and our deepest anxieties so often lingers in our present mind, a latent wound, that can appear at any moment when we find our lives significantly interrupted. We should learn to take frequent moments to address these and to accept them as an inevitability of life. 


<h2>Gratitude</h2>

It is a strange exercise in gratitude when we realise how fortunate we are in the most unfortunate of circumstances. It is often in the absence of something that we realise it was there in the first place, and how important a role it played even if it wasn’t deemed particularly glamorous. Instead of retreating to our ennui we can come to realise how often we skip past the simple things, because they are staple parts of our busy lives where we must encounter the new to consider life ‘moving in the right direction’. When something beyond our control puts a stop to this fragile disposition we can learn how fortunate we are to be able to turn the heating up when we are cold, to taste an ingredient we cannot pronounce or to have neighbours who show a genuine concern for our welfare. We can commit ourselves more intensely to all those things that express immense value in our everyday lives, whose only crime is being familiar. Often the conversation about living a so-called great life involves grandiose plans and ambitions and an exhaustive supply of energy, gusto and fearlessness. All these traits have their value, but it seems strange that what is often treated with disregard in this conversation are some rather crucial ingredients: our perceptions to the ordinary. 

We do not have the luxury to gloss over the present with lofty dreams of perfection when we realise life is very much imperfect. Perfection is a curse placed on our future selves. Of course we should plan and dream but we should not do so to the absence of the present, because what has been shown is that we cannot rely on the future to follow our minds lofty ambitions. We must learn to make the most out of the present, perhaps to see the world as a painter might when looking for their next acute observation from ‘ordinary’ life, this could be anything from a particularly striking piece of fruit or the way the grass vibrates in the wind. But more than this we must also become more attuned to those in our immediate surroundings who are in need of our company. By committing ourselves more firmly to others we may find communion in times of hardship. To express gratitude, even if unfolds internally is to accept how strange life really is and that we should perhaps pay attention to the oddities of existence, and realise nothing is ordinary. It is possible for one to do this and to also dream about and plan the future. The benefit is that if we try and we fail, perhaps because Lady Fortuna is not on our side, then this ok because we still have in place the ability to enjoy and be perceptive to what we have control over: the present. 

<h2>Peace</h2>

Of course we want to see an end to such circumstances of confinement because life is very much about the new, but when we once again have the opportunity to bolt off into the unknown we can so with a pinch more freedom and a touch less anxiety because we have learnt to extract emotional value from the present. Not only can this make us more emotional robust, more sympathetic people but it can also provide us with a more sustainable blueprint as to how to we should live our lives. This mindset need not be separate from ambition. What it does do is reaffirms to us that all we have now may be, for want of a better word, enough. Meaning what is most important is what consists of the present and how lucky we may be if we share it with kind, passionate people in a well-lit room with a satisfactory supply of exotic foods. We should give ourselves permission in all the madness to feel a necessary sense of calm. 

