---
layout: post
title:  "On thinking too much about the future"
date:   2020-02-16
categories: [philosophy]
---

There is an inherent psychological danger in thinking too much about the future. By prioritising that particular timeframe can essentially ruin the one which we have most control over – that being the present. When we envisage the future and our place in it, we undoubtedly picture ourselves to be at the end of some journey whereby we have reached the pinnacle of our deepest desires. We see ourselves happily married to the man or woman of our dreams with perfect children and a beautiful home and ultimately equipped with a wash of serene happiness. The danger with sticking to closely to a preordained future is that it can make the present rather difficult for ourselves. 

By thinking too firmly and rigidly about the future suddenly puts all of our present decisions firmly in the spotlight. Nobody pictures a mediocre future for themselves. By that I mean no one actively chooses to limit their relative ambition and pictures their future self in a spark-less marriage with some annoying kids in a house where the shower keeps leaking, and then feels content about such a vision. To dwell too firmly on the future can create excessive anxiety in the present, it can make you neurotically indecisive for fear that the decision you make will undoubtedly be the wrong one and thus impede upon the future you desire. Each wrong decision will blur the unnecessarily perfect future you have envisioned for yourself. 

It is instead best to treat the future as not some utopian conclusion but rather much like the present with familiar problems and perhaps some new problems, all we can hope for is that we learn enough along the way to deal with those problems a little more succinctly. Maturity comes from reflecting on the present rather than attaching ourselves to the future in the hope that our imagination operates as a crystal ball provided we act out our lives according to this future. If we live according to some distant, heavily filtered narrative, concocted in our own mind then we risk missing out on so much in the present. If we live in the future then we subject ourselves to misery in the present. To set our own ambition to such definable characteristics and to do so at the sacrifice of the now is not conducive to a healthy mind. The risk of living for the future is that by the time we reach that age what it is we want may change and we will forever be adapting our expectations accordingly. Those with counter-adaptive preferences will always struggle to be at peace. We don’t even know that the path we assign our future to will even make us happy. A failure to live in the present is a rejection of the fact that we are but mortal, fragile beings whose future at some point will run out, and we will wish we enjoyed a little more of the process to get there. 

It is in fact a comforting thought that we are all going to die. ‘To philosophise is to learn to die’ Montaigne said popularising Cicero. A man who had an incredibly insightful understanding of how to live is Montaigne, and in his Essays you will find non-stop examples of a man thoroughly appreciative of what was around him and used this to overcome grief and to live a life of content. This was a man who lived in the present, and with that he achieved some extraordinary things. The two are not mutually exclusive. Just as George Orwell wrote an eleven step guide to the perfect cup of tea Montaigne marvelled at the everyday customs those he encountered when he travelled. To say that was part of his genius is to miss the point, because that would be to distance oneself from what it is an example of. The fact that the simplicity of life is wonderfully underappreciated by routinely driven lives and the fact that we are freaked-out, for want of a better word, when someone talks about the beauty of a flower if they do not have the reputational might of a Montaigne or an Orwell. That is rather to miss the point of living, to forget the advertisement that Art provides us. 

Being more perceptive in the present and living accordingly is the antidote for the chaotic and future-orientated world that we live in. 
