---
layout: post
title:  "Huxley on Propaganda"
date:   2020-06-15
categories: [politics]
---

In politics before we ask what we are hoping to achieve we should first ask what are we hoping to avoid.

As Nassim Taleb writes in _Antifragile_ &quot;In political systems, a good mechanism is one that helps remove the bad guy; it&#39;s not about what to do or who to put in. For the bad guy can cause more harm than the collective actions of good ones.&quot; In the 20th century the political optimism of the enlightenment looked to have faltered and a number of novels portrayed a society we should be looking to avoid rather than one we should be hoping to form.

Late in Aldous Huxley&#39;s life he decided to revisit the themes of his most popular novel _Brave New World_ through a series of essays titled _Brave New World Revisited_. They provide a salient warning as to the state of western society: that the themes of his novel published 30 years prior seemed to have become more pronounced in everyday life, unfortunately making the novel predictive rather than redemptive. A case could be made that a more potent form of his dystopia is now in play with more opportune mechanisms in place to elect the wrong kind of politician.

The essays as a whole should be essential reading for anyone wishing to fend off the dreamy dystopia Huxley envisaged as well as the more rugged dystopia of Orwell&#39;s _1984_. In particular there are two essays titled &#39;Propaganda in a Democratic Society&#39; and &#39;Propaganda in a Dictatorship&#39;, both of which you will find near impossible to argue have aged badly. It is these two essays that are the most revealing as to the current relationship between the elected and the electorate, and the dangers of the increasing access the former has to the latter.

<br>
<h3>Propaganda in a Democratic Society</h3>

Given many in the west live in &#39;Democracies&#39; its best to start with the slightly less unpalatable, propaganda in a democratic society. Huxley believed the role of democratic institutions was to provide social order in partnership with a necessary amount of individual autonomy and freedom, whilst allowing rulers to be subject to the ruled. While this may not always be the most effective form of governance, and includes a lot of abstract terms for qualification, it is very much the depiction of democracy we have settled in our mind. So the question we should be eager to explore is how we might slide from this Spinozian depiction into a more unfavourable political system.

Huxley saw two trends taking effect that had in turn weakened the efficiency of the democratic institutions we now value so highly. One being overpopulation, the other being over-organisation (this was written in the late 1950s when the world population stood a little under 3 billion). Huxley believed these two growing problems had led to a recession in the democratic freedom that the west had enjoyed for so long. We have had the gift of self-governance and yet due to the difficulty in reconciling this among millions of people, it has left the door open for individual politicians to gain unjustifiable power. This is probably the most important, and potentially destructive, modern critique of democracy – that being it doesn&#39;t scale well. This is why using Ancient Athens to assess a modern democratic state is foolish, they are incomparable.

Propaganda is at the heart of a transition from democracy to something towards dictatorship and totalitarianism, it is a tool democratic politicians may use to cultivate power. Huxley distinguishes between the rational and non-rational forms. Non-rational propaganda being defined as &quot;that which is not consonant with anybody&#39;s enlightened self-interest, but is dictated by, and appeals to, passions, blind impulses, unconscious craving or fears&quot;. Rational propaganda on the other hand may not be as well-suited to the electoral cycle in that it promotes the country&#39;s long-term self-interest, which Huxley believed could lead to &quot;an earthly paradise&quot;. While this may be too utopian to stomach it is a considerably more healthy approach than the contrary. Unfortunately, as Huxley warned, we seem closer to the non-rational form; propaganda has been used more to appeal to our collective emotions rather than our individual long-term needs. The rational version seems to fall outside the realm of political leaders even if it can be found within the actions of the state.

An obvious way in which this divergence occurs between the rational and the non-rational is with the use of &#39;the facts&#39; in political language. In Politics, unlike science, it can be more difficult to determine what the pertinent facts may be, a problem that has plagued both religious and secular ethics. If they are determined then the interpretation of these facts are dependent your own system of ideas. For example people will often find teleological reasons to justify a lie when they know the truth, even if they believe lying is in itself wrong.

A common danger is that we have insufficient time to determine the full picture of events. The means of mass communication throw so much at us that &quot;we are forced to act on insufficient evidence and by a light considerably less steady than logic&quot;. This has only become more pervasive since Huxley&#39;s time as non-rational propaganda has become easier to disguise. It is important to note that technological means of mass communication have no inherent allegiance; they can either be used well or unwell. Propaganda can be used to promote democracy, or to power dictatorship or some other form of authoritarianism.

The role of non-rational propaganda through new technologies has perhaps seen society tilt further away from fragile democratic values with a new breeding ground for a demagogues and dictators. As Huxley wanted to show, the tool that could encourage this process was the use of distraction. He asserts that propaganda not only incorporates the dichotomy over what is true and what is false, but now includes the totally irrelevant, in the hope that it satisfies our &quot;almost infinite appetite for distractions&quot;. If it wasn&#39;t already hard enough to determine the facts and then to sufficiently digest them in a logical manner, the ubiquity of distraction has made it perhaps impossible in many cases to understand the full picture. We do not have the time to think clearly if we are constantly consuming propaganda. We will find it increasingly difficult to differentiate between the truth, the false or the evocative distraction.

In Huxley&#39;s dystopian novel _Brave New World_, distractions are used as a political tool, they are policy instruments to prevent citizens from &quot;paying too much attention to the realities of the social and political situation&quot;. Looking back on his novel almost 30 years later Huxley saw a world slipping closer to the one he had warned of. With over 60 years since the reflections of _Brave New World Revisited_ it seems clear that we live in a time where his warning still resonates, perhaps even a little louder. We could define entertainment as the new &#39;opium of the people&#39;, the distractions that dilutes the search for truth. Whilst politicians themselves have not bound these instruments to the state, they have certainly provided generous leeway for their political ambition.

Huxley finishes the essay with a definition of how a dictator uses propaganda in that they rely &quot;for the most part on repetition, suppression and rationalization – the repetition of catchwords which wish to be accepted as true, the suppression of facts which they wish to be ignored, the arousal and rationalization of passions which may be used in the interests of the party or the state&quot;. Given this feels a little close to the bone for our modern, democratically elected leaders it is slightly unnerving that Huxley was referring to the work of dictators. To see where this might lead us Huxley&#39;s next essay can provide some clarity.

<br>
<h3>Propaganda in a Dictatorship</h3>

The question we should ask in the context of modern democratic states is how did Hitler&#39;s political rise reach such a crescendo of power. In addressing this Huxley provides a stark warning about groupthink and the subtlety with which devious politicians can be found in the hot seat with some effective exploitation of mass psychology. A huge part of Hitler&#39;s artillery for onboarding the masses was his use of technology.

In a nod to Orwell, Huxley states &quot;thanks to technological progress, Big Brother can now be almost as omnipresent as God&quot;. Mass manipulation has diversified away from the art of political rhetoric; it has become scientific - or computational as we might now say. Huxley showcases Hitler&#39;s rise as an example of the mind-control of the masses he feared becoming subversive to western democracies. Modern dictators had at their hands new technology to reach into the ears and minds of the masses. Technology, as Huxley knew, is neither morally good nor bad but instead can be used as a tool to do good or bad. Hitler was an adept user of the radio, but this did not make the radio a fundamentally immoral piece of technology. Yet through his broadcasts he could get inside the heads of millions of listeners and slowly promote his own narrative upon people, &quot;depriving them of independent thought&quot; – writes Huxley quoting Albert Speer, a Nazi minister sentenced at the Nuremberg trials.

Hitler&#39;s understanding of mass behaviour did unfortunately go deeper than the radio, he knew that to truly manipulate the masses he needed to gather them together and stir their emotions. This instinctive reaction people had to his charismatic oration fed off the emotive reactions of others. As Huxley notes &quot;assembled in a crowd, people lose their powers of reasoning and their capacity for moral choice… they become very excitable, they lose all sense of individual or collective responsibility.&quot; Perhaps this all seems a little farfetched in modernity where we might say we have reached a level of political maturity so as not to be fooled by the rhetoric of our leaders and the madness of crowds. We know too much to be put into myopic boxes, we are too wise to feel the powerful gravity of groupthink. We might feel we are not fooled by rallying cries because we have learnt from the past. This all seems a rather loose depiction of the modern citizen. What we really learn from the past is that some things are a lot easier to work out retrospectively. We can point our fingers at the mistakes of the past, perhaps question the intelligence of a well-educated nation, all the while the same thing may be going on in our own time through entirely different channels. As history shows new technology provides new ways for a politician to fool the masses with their unbeholden beliefs, it is a great tragedy if the tactical battle is fought over how to do this rather than over how to promote a country&#39;s long term interest.

Where Huxley does begin to really strike a chord with modernity is when he moves on to the use of propaganda by the dictator, which was described earlier. First he distinguishes between philosophy and propaganda – the first being a healthy scepticism for that which seems self-evident to us and the latter being to accept as self-evident that which we should make us &quot;suspend our judgement or to feel doubt&quot;. Hitler wrote about effective propaganda as if there was a clear methodology to its success; a how-to guide for dictators. An example being the propagandist should take one side of an argument and never sway, nor should the propagandist admit they are wrong or admit those they disagree with may be somewhat correct on a subject of contention. Instead of attempting to reason with these opponents the propagandist dictator should attack them, shout at them perhaps. They should deny they have anything useful to say, twist the truth in appeal to the masses. Perhaps this starts to feel more familiar to us.

Hitler would not have been in a position of power if it wasn&#39;t for his clear understanding of mass psychology, while deranged on other matters his knowledge of how propaganda can appeal to the collective proved unfortunately effective. Of course there were myriad reasons for Hitler&#39;s rise to power, but you cannot deny his understanding of mass behaviour was a key component. The outcome according to Huxley was &quot;herd-poisoning&quot;. Huxley&#39;s solution, much like Thoreau, was that people should learn to _think for themselves_. This may sound too obvious but there is a deeper truth to it in that it is too easy for us to be swayed by the masses before we have thought about an issue ourselves. Thoreau thought it best to serve your own mind first in order to improve civil society. Huxley writes along similar lines but adds the necessity of thinking for oneself is also for protection from the spell that can be cast over the masses, going on to say &quot;mindlessness and moral idiocy are not characteristically human attributes; they are symptoms of herd poisoning&quot;. By Huxley&#39;s reckoning to look at people as simply members of the masses Hitler got his assessment of human nature correct, but to look at people as individuals in their own right he got it sadistically wrong. The fact that he was allowed to prevail should be a warning to us all. We are all fundamentally different, and as Huxley rightly knew democracy is the least-worst political culture we have to accommodate this peacefully.

<br>
<h3>Why should we care?</h3>

Looking at propaganda in our own democracies it seems we have plenty of the unhealthy kind, it is certainly difficult to argue they are full of the rational propaganda. Politically we don&#39;t really know where that leaves us. Unfortunately this is kernel to what Huxley is saying, that if we don&#39;t know if we are where we don&#39;t want to be then we may already be there. Not quite QED, but it couldn&#39;t hurt to assume the transition from democracy to dictatorship or some form of authoritarianism may be more subtle than we would expect. These essays matter not because they are proposing a revolutionary new form of politics but more importantly because they are trying to safeguard us against the entropy of democratic politics.

But why should we care what Huxley has to say about propaganda? Is it not after all just a side-effect of politics, are there not more prudent ways we should use our time, does it really matter if we see more of the non-rational propaganda when we can still spot a potential Hitler? Unfortunately yes because the potential penalty for not caring has increased and the way the wrong kind of propaganda permeates society is more subtle than we would like to think. What we supposedly value not just in politics but also in our own lives will become unhinged if the wrong politicians come into contact with technology we or they do not fully understand, meaning we will only realise the ramifications retrospectively. All those that supposedly value their autonomy will unfortunately find themselves at the hands of political irony if they proceed to never question their motive for voting the way they do.

Most people desire to be originators of their own thoughts, but how many would admit this is not entirely true for themselves. Unfortunately information overload has lowered the drawbridge for myopia and groupthink. The world has become more complex and the unknown multiplicative network effects of the internet and its information will scramble many a mind if it seeks to constantly &#39;keep up to date&#39; with the world. A mind saturated with information, no matter its authenticity, cannot hope to become a thinking one, let alone a wise one. We are suffering from a crisis of political wisdom, without which we cannot hope to spot the early-warning signs of an unstable democracy. It seems an opportune moment for Huxley&#39;s fears to flourish.

As it stands no modern democracies have a Hitler in power, but if anything Huxley shows how easy it might be to wake up one day and realise it&#39;s too late. Propaganda is a powerful tool and technology provides new means with which to orchestrate it to the masses. What is crucial to this in Huxley&#39;s message is how distractions may be used in a propaganda; if we can say anything about modern democracies it is that the tools to distract us are ubiquitous. If we were subjected to the non-rational propaganda then we would struggle to fully understand the effects of its transmission across modern technologies. For example the psychological and sociological complexities of social media are difficult to identify with any degree of confidence. This is ultimately what we should be aware of: how little we really know in the face of the new. Perhaps then we will become a little more conscious of our own behaviour.

The solution is not to bury ourselves in conspiracy theories, Huxley would suggest we take some time every now and then to check our premises, perhaps sit in a corner on our own to think freely. We may perhaps conclude that social media is where the new masses gather and emotions are stirred, or notice that modern politicians do rarely admit they are wrong or allow their opposition to be considered right. We need to feel confident our behaviour is not simply following the herd but is instead a conclusion we have come to in our own minds as to what is right and what is wrong irrespective of how many people may be following suit. Groups can both distort and elevate our thinking, to be on the safe side it might be better to think independently first then get together in groups, otherwise we may find ourselves in a constant mimetic state. Conversing is crucial for adjusting our own positions, but in order for this to be a successful use of time we should first have convictions of our own that we are humble enough to change or knowledgeable enough to defend.