---
layout: post
title:  "Is rewilding ambitious enough"
date:   2022-09-14
categories: [sustainability]
---

f you were to consult Adam and Eve about rewilding they would probably look at you in disgust. Did you even see the Garden of Eden? So much better.
Rewilding is a ubiquitous term used in journalistic and policy-making spheres, thus making it disparate in its interpretation. As a fundamental principle it’s utility for restoring biodiversity is of course, necessary. In the UK, where the green fields paper over the widening cracks in biodiversity loss, a bit more rewilding can surely only be a good thing? Surely we can afford to devote a few more sections of the land to wildlife. But is this what rewilding is really about — or should it, in fact, be more ambitious?

There’s something uncomfortably paradoxical about the semantics of rewilding: it is so often portrayed as being about bringing back nature and reconnecting with it, yet at the same time it is about separating from it, cordoning it off from ourselves; removing the biblical temptation to spoil it. A bit like the Dad getting carried away with the Lego his son persuaded him to play with, it ends up with Dad telling son: ‘don’t touch anything!’ after he erects a perfectly organised town square. There is something slightly masochistic about the ambition of this desire, as if we must punish ourselves with restrictions. As noble as this may appear, it neglects all those unquantifiable benefits humans get from interacting with nature. It is cooperation not separation that should be the driving force of rewilding. If we are trying to build a healthier relationship with the rest of nature then this is the approach that must be taken. In the long run, working out the relative efficiencies of sharing versus sparing misses the vital psychological components attached to both.

Just to be clear, this is not against the concept of rewilding but rather to understand that detaching large swathes of the world to be untouched by humanity is rather naive perception of human curiosity. This is an approach favoured by the half-earth theory: to be human-free. But how many generations will that last? Is it not surely better, to embrace the natural world rather than divide it. To have a society that evolves in partnership with the natural world is what we must strive towards, which means to bring it closer into our lives rather than pushing it further away.

Getting people to feel restricted is not a very good way for the human spirit to flourish, not in the long-run anyway. Covid-19 showed us this. People will always go where they shouldn’t go and do things they shouldn’t do. It may not be in this generation, but it will be the next or the one after that. One day, all that you have assigned to nature will reverse engineer itself to human-led destruction. The only way we can overcome this is if we fundamentally alter our connection and relationship with the natural world. Only when we have a society that values this connection, and finds an Attenborough-like joy in it, can we thrive in the long-run whilst nurturing our precious biodiversity. It’s hard to save what you don’t love. It’s hard to love something that you have never experienced.

The language of rewilding sounds far-removed from this. It is about giving it back to nature, as if we are a guilty imperial nation returning our stolen jewels. But this is not the case. We are all living in the natural world, we are an inescapable part of it. It is precisely this separation and competition that is the trouble. In a way, cordoning off parts of the natural world is not only naive, but also a hopeless vision of human nature. One in which we can’t be trusted to behave or change. It is short-termist. It admits we can have no positive impact on nature beyond restoring it to life without us. It is a form of damage limitation that hinders our chance to connect.

In some visions, rewilding plays out similarly to a guilty ex-lover leaving an apologetic bouquet on their former partner’s doorstep. As soon as we leave it we run away hoping to avoid contact, scurrying back to our concrete and house plants. Our guilt pacified momentarily. Yet guilt is not a powerful enough driver of human action or a strong enough tonic to remove deeper troubles. As Julia Watson writes, Darwin’s survival of the fittest is now replaced by survival of the most symbiotic. Those civilisations that work with nature, for mutually beneficial purposes, will endure. We need to stop pretending it is mutually exclusive to interact with nature and not destroy it. The most sustainable communities in the world are the indigenous communities. They are embedded in nature, rather than tying themselves on a lead.

It is of course a fine balance, one perhaps not known until reached. We were once too negligible to impact, now we are big enough to tip it one way or another. That is why it is better to work with nature, to accept our part — isn’t that what sustainability was supposed to be about? Rather than trying to inhibit our natural inclinations. It is far harder, if not impossible, to change someone’s mind by tuition. You have to change the context in which they operate if you really want to change anything significant. Rather than focusing so religiously on rewilding we should be looking to scale up the methods of cooperation that have worked for so long. Thinking, how can we integrate nature into our cities? How can we grow food in keeping with biodiversity goals? What lessons from indigenous ways of living can be scaled?

People say these ideas can’t be scaled with our mega-populations, but that’s because they’re thinking of copying the exact way of living of an Amazonian tribe, which is really learning nothing about the diversity of indigenous communities on the planet. It is about adapting to your own context, to your own climate. It is a paradox to us, that focusing on everyday living within these communities has made them the most sustainable. But if we really want sustainability, there is no choice but to begin a long-term shift to integrate with nature, starting with the everyday. Cordoning it off is not really learning anything from history.

Of course there should undoubtedly be some highly protected areas, and some slightly less highly protected areas such as national parks, because this acknowledges we are the dominant species and haven’t quite yet worked out what that means. There are also large parts of the planet we humans don’t really want to live, and there is always room for wildlife corridors. However, this doesn’t mean we need to abandon a symbiotic relationship with the natural world; we must continue to learn how to partner with it. When you are this big a player, you forget how dependent you are on everything else. Yet, it is in being such a dominant species that makes it imperative you don’t forget.

Half-Earth theory may be ecological sound in theory but this shows a neglect of human nature. In a way it encourages a status quo in the modern consumer lifestyle. I can keep doing what I’m doing because someone in Scotland is rewilding an abandoned estate. Perhaps most importantly there is the tragic human element to all of this; that deep down we value nature in a way that data cannot show, and we might all be more inclined to unexpected happiness if it was a bigger part of our lives. That is a story much more likely to drive human action. If you want people to care about the natural world, make them experience it. Then, and only then, it might be possible to picture ourselves as a positive member of an ecosystem.

In the long-run the tragedy of the commons may reassert itself over market solutions, wouldn’t it be best if there were no tragedy in the first place? Is this too noble an aim? A question worth asking.
