---
layout: post
title:  "We need to talk about Jevons: on the paradox of innovation"
date:   2023-09-12
categories: [sustainability, technology]
---

There was an excessively marshalled ritual that took place when I was at school. It was given the rather detoxifying, self-help book type of label: ‘switch-off fortnight’, as if we were all about to go on a meditation retreat or overpay to visit some Swiss alpine spa and have people in angelically white clothing give us numbered scores about our digestive system. The whole event was ironically met with such Draconian enthusiasm by fellow pupils that most of study time would involve switching back on the light after someone decided it wasn’t necessary for you to see your homework. The religious devotion with which people threw themselves into this task hardly reflected how unimportant it actually was. It was a pacified, climate-change version of the Milgram experiment. The whole thing essentially tricked us into thinking it bore some respectable semblance of impact. Which it most certainly did not. But as an isolated event it still lingers in the mind because it portrayed using less as some kind of inconvenient sacrifice. As if using less, in some fundamental way, inhibited life.

We mentally struggle with the idea that using less is anything other than a desperate option, as if it somehow indicates a backward, blind step along the sketchy tightrope of progress. Like all seemingly irrational rationalisations, there is probably some evolutionary reason for this. This may leave us feeling defeated, because when was the last time evolution helped us out of a tight spot? It is after all, a famously long-term strategist. We may think that doing the same amount, or a bit more with less is in fact the opposite of progress and yet isn’t that just technology? More with less. In many overly bureaucratised workplaces it appears to be the opposite, but that’s really a whole other issue of decline. What is worth considering is whether people can feel their lives improving whilst at the same time using less. Even just feeling their lives not getting worse and worse would be an improvement for many people in both poor and rich countries alike. Of course, people can improve their lives spiritually, mentally, and emotionally; all synonyms of the same deep exhale. But can the final box be ticked? Whether you consider it the least important of what constitutes a good life, can a tending away from economic poverty be done so without sacrifice. Or is it still plagued by the apocryphal human story: that sacrifice is a necessary element of the human condition. And if that is true then what happens if you continue to push more and more? Well you may end up in the same situation as if you went the other way. Stretch elastic far enough and it snaps. 

William Stanley Jevons, a victorian economist, showed that technological progress can under some circumstance lead to a paradox. He noticed that the increase in efficiencies of using coal led to a fall in price, and consequently, an increase in demand. He noticed that doing more with less in the long run led to using more coal than in the initial state of higher prices and greater inefficiencies. Improved energy efficiency had in fact increased the overall consumption of energy. People use more as the price goes down, simple. Economics 101. This is particularly the case when there are more people that have the capacity to use energy, and more cases in which people can use more energy. This is precisely the problem: we re-establish what it means to be economically prosperous every time a new energy-draining device comes into our lives. Renewable energy will achieve nothing except industrialise non-industrial landscapes (and pollute future landscapes) if it only accommodates this additional demand for energy. You cannot make the wind blow harder or the sun shine stronger when more and more people demand more and more energy. So what do you end up doing? Well you build more and more for more and more. But hell, who cares about the grandkids when there are elections to be won every four or five years. Who cares about the landscape when there is bitcoin to be mined. 

So is the answer just to make everything painfully expensive? But what happens in a time when the price goes up though. People may naturally use less, but in many cases they will still need the same electricity they were using before. So provided they can pay their bills it is likely there will be an asymmetric, inelastic, response in demand to the price increasing. Sure, they may watch a little less TV and turn the lights off a bit more often, but for the most part, they bite the bullet and become increasingly irate as they do so. Cheap fuel becomes priced into our subconscious and our lives become accustomed to that level of demand. We continually rebase our expectations of what is necessary and what is not. When it gets cheaper we find ways to use more of it, to make our unfortunately limited leisure time a bit more comfortable, but no more content. Then when energy gets unexpectedly more expensive, we are too entrenched in the initial readjustment we can’t unwillingly reverse our demand unless financially constrained. Instead we demand higher wages and nobody wins except the guy providing the energy. 

Technology has brought with it a number of new appliances and devices that require an energy input. This means technology ends up wrestling with itself as energy efficiency has to constantly try outperform this additional demand. If we had to stop using the things we didn’t know existed ten years ago then we’d consider it a sacrifice worthy of Abraham’s. This shows that not only does our definition of what is necessary change, but our definition of sacrifice becomes equally distorted from literally being about life or death. We don’t seem to adjust our default expectations of what we need in both directions. Only when we can use more energy do we consider additional uses of necessity, the reverse is not the case: we don’t consider not using our new Hot Chocolate Velvetiser 3000 Pro Max as anything other than social regression. There is no merit in putting it to the back of the cupboard.

But then, the source of our misery can also be the source of a solution. We can’t end the more and more situation without technological innovation. Yet industries that have to keep employing more and more cheaper and cheaper labour have been so scared off by innovation for what is undoubtedly a multitude of reasons. But to have a society that demands more and more and yet is under and on the surface sclerotic and highly bureaucratic is nothing other than a disaster waiting to happen, incapable of even an ounce of pragmatism. You cannot have your cake and eat it as Jevons shows. You cannot keep asking more from such a small island with such a growing demand for everything. Even if it is not a problem now, it will be one day soon. You don’t need a crystal ball, you just need to understand the laws of physics. Twenty years ago you could have predicted the demographic problems of our current age, but instead policy treated it like a problem that would only pass itself onto the gravediggers. Just chuck more bodies at the problem like an unfairly portrayed Persian army. What works in the short term doesn’t necessarily work in the long term. 

If innovation is to decrease energy consumption per capita then it needs to also occur tangentially. Rather than simply decreasing the cost of supply, which might not necessarily be passed on to consumers and is subjected to the vagaries of the world economy, innovation should also be looking at decreasing the use of it without people feeling like they have to sacrifice their kettle. It may be as simple as changing a flickering yellow light bulb. But the innovation angle is the easier bit, getting people to feel as if their lives can get better by demanding less of the world is a tougher ask. There’s a possibility its impossible at a certain scale of society. Innovation alone cannot soothe our need for more. Cornucopia is a perennial dream that just won’t go away. These problems may not be short-term and perhaps that explains their neglect in election chatter, but perhaps its also because no one really has any serious answers to these problems. The Leviathan has no reverse gear, it either moves forwards or breaks down. 

So where does that leave us from a practical point of view? It is a problem everyone knows about but doesn’t want to admit: growth can be excrescent. Limits can be reached. The solutions will require more creativity than carrying on in some self-destructing verse of bureaucratic capitalism or banal communism. In a world that impressively finds a way to increasingly both regurgitate and misinterpret itself, that looks like a hell of challenge. 
