---
layout: post
title:  "How can voluntary carbon markets deliver credible GHG removal at scale? | Essay"
date:   2021-12-16
categories: [sustainability, economics]
tags: {essay}
---
Voluntary carbon markets (VCMs) differ from compliance markets in that they are not regulated by mandate; instead companies or individuals can offset carbon voluntarily through alternative carbon markets (Kollmuss, Zink & Polycarp, 2008). These voluntary markets have grown quickly over recent years; carbon credit demand could increase by a factor of 15 by 2030 (Blaufelder et al. 2021). The efficacy of VCMs and the legitimacy of this demand is therefore imperative in delivering credible Greenhouse gas (GHG) removal at scale. In the context of this essay, a credible scale of GHG removal is in line with the UN’s net-zero outline. This states net-zero must be achieved by 2050, and to ensure warming is limited to below 2 degrees above pre-industrial levels as per the Paris Agreement. This will require substantial emissions cuts before 2030 relative to 2010 levels (United Nations, 2021).
The credibility of VCMs are intertwined with the ambition of the Paris Agreement, meaning it is important to assess their contribution in line with this UN timescale. This will be addressed both on the demand-side and supply-side, particularly around the concept of additionality. The second factor to consider after additionality, is that of legitimacy; this addresses whether the credits traded through VCMs are effective sources of GHG removal for the targets outlined. Discussion will then move on to how VCMs can induce innovation to deliver GHG removal at scale. This essay will largely refer to carbon dioxide removal given the discussion is around VCMs, but there is no reason why similar markets cannot bring the same benefit to other GHGs such as methane.

###Putting a price on carbon
A market failure does not have to be addressed by strict regulation, it can be fixed through the creation of another market. GHG emissions are a form of market failure because the externality is not priced into the existing market, hence the need for a market that prices carbon. Markets can be used as environmental policy in that they can take into account the environmental cost, whilst achieving this at a relatively low economic cost compared to stringent regulation (Hanley, Shogren & White, 2019).
Pricing carbon will incentivise the expansion of removal technologies and projects, towards the level of emissions necessary to meet the targets of the Paris Agreement; current prices ought to be raised to the region of $40-80 per tonne of Carbon to meet this target (The Economist, 2020). Rather than analysing the effect of carbon trading in general, this essay will outline the additional benefits of a VCM. These markets rely on a different set of incentives to compliance markets.
It is important to note that the carbon market is not a zero-sum game between voluntary and compliance markets. As Guigon (2010) points out, the voluntary market can supplement the compliance market by being the first building block towards a more defined domestic carbon market in those countries without an already established market. Therefore given they exist outside of Government regulation, private companies will drive future demand in voluntary markets (Kreibich & Hermwille, 2021). In 2020 the number of corporations committing to net-zero more than doubled, many of whom will be using VCMs to achieve these targets (VCMI, 2021).

####Demand Side Additionality
Additionality involves establishing whether the intended outcome would have gone ahead without the market in place (Hyams & Fawcett, 2013). On the demand side this refers to whether the carbon credits purchased are expanding the companies ambitions or whether they would have been achieved anyway, and may in fact slow progress of internal climate targets.
For many companies offsets are the only way to achieve targets of carbon or GHG neutrality, examples being energy companies such as Shell or mining companies (Kreibich & Hermwille, 2021). This makes accessing carbon credits imperative. For those companies that can change their operations to have less emissions, this concept needs to be addressed more stringently. For example, would a company purchasing carbon credits in a new afforestation project, where carbon sequestration is lower during the early growth phase, be better than if the company used those resources to shift to renewable energy internally? It may be that the latter is more effective in meeting the Paris Agreement targets given the urgent need for GHG removal. The timeframe and opportunity cost therefore need to be accounted for in such decisions. Voluntary markets should be seen as a supplement for internal innovation or transition, not a deterrent. These markets cannot discourage internal innovation in companies if they want to credibly contribute to GHG removal.  
Greenwashing is a legitimate concern because it expresses the idea that firms may do the minimum required to prioritise their image, rather than implement the deeper change that may be required (Hyams & Fawcett, 2013). This is addressed by Spaargaren and Mol (2013), who state that because voluntary markets are governed by the market and NGOs rather than Government, greenwashing and problems of additionality can be addressed by the media and highlighted in the public domain. This is a very neo-liberal argument for addressing informational asymmetries; however as the Volkswagen emissions scandal showed, these incidents can be brought to public light with huge reputational consequences for companies with customers and shareholders.
The global paradigm shift from the Kyoto Protocol to the Paris agreement has implications for VCMs now that GHG emission reduction targets are ubiquitous rather than largely the reserve of the industrialised nations. VCMs will have to be realigned towards the Paris agreement (Kreibich & Hermwille, 2021). Lang, Blum and Leipold (2019) indicate this may be a problem if it restricts cross-border purchasing of carbon credits as Governments look to meet their own domestic targets. The implication being that less money flows into developing countries from the developing world. However, as previously mentioned, VCMs will primarily be driven by private companies. Many of these companies operate globally with global supply chains, and therefore it seems likely companies will continue to look for credits across the globe. The ambitions of the Paris Agreement has filtered into more solidified targets for these companies which should result in more capital flowing into global GHG removal projects via VCMs. Apple have proven you can innovate internally to reduce emissions whilst simultaneously partaking in VCMs; they have invested in nature-based carbon removal projects throughout the world (Apple Inc., 2021). It is a false dichotomy to assume otherwise; the two are not mutually exclusive. Apple show how VCMs can work effectively on the demand-side as a supplement to internal change, with the work fully reported and visible to consumers so as to prevent greenwashing.

###Supply-side additionality
As established, a growing appetite for GHG removal in the voluntary markets is for the most part a good thing in achieving the net-zero ambition. However, consideration also must be given to the supply-side of these GHG removal projects. We again need to consider the additionality concept to address whether GHG removal projects would have gone ahead without being a part of the VCM. As Hyams and Fawcett (2013) argue, there is an inherent problem in dealing with additionality, in that it relies on counterfactuals. It is therefore difficult for the market to account for this. A legitimate challenge on the back of the Paris Agreement target is whether GHG removal projects are already incorporated in the host country’s target plans, whilst also being a part of VCMs (Lang, Blum and Leipold 2019). There are ways to avoid this error of duplication: if needed, testing for additionality can be carried out to uphold the integrity of the Paris Agreement as discussed by Michaelowa et al. (2019). For VCMs to avoid double-counting credits then oversight is needed to assess this, as well as accounting for the legitimacy of what is being labelled as a carbon credit.
It is important to note that just because the discussion is around voluntary markets, this is not to be confused with a lack of oversight. Platforms such as the Voluntary Carbon Markets Initiative aim to establish the integrity of both the demand and supply side of the market, tackling problems of greenwashing, poor environmental integrity and mis-selling (VCMI, 2021). A successful VCM requires aligning all stakeholders to the Paris Agreement and ensuring that both suppliers of GHG removal projects and companies looking to purchase carbon credits have access to a market of integrity.

###Innovation
As Steck (2021) alludes to, GHG removal at scale will require both nature-based solutions and geoengineering solutions. Many of these projects are intrinsically unprofitable. For example nature-based solutions may involve restoring peatlands to sequester carbon dioxide even though there is no financial incentive to do so. A VCM creates an incentive, particularly in cases where there is no Government funding; if there is then it may accelerate the growth of these projects. A value is placed on nature through a VCM, according to its sequestration effect. This may be more effective if VCMs account for the co-benefits of nature-based solutions, as expressed by Diaz et al. (2015). Whilst VCMs encourage technological innovation it shouldn’t be to the neglect of nature-based solutions; the benefits of which extend beyond GHG removal. Projects with such multiple benefits should demand a higher price (Steck, 2021).  
As mentioned, VCMs channel funds into a range of GHG removal projects including nascent technologies. These new technologies may not be verified under the compliance-based markets, and therefore not accessible to these markets. A benefit of a VCM is that these projects can be financed. Whilst some of these projects carry risk, Streck (2021) maintains these can be addressed through various credible standards and accountability for the corporations purchasing the credits, thus incentivising legitimate practise. Given the urgency of the net-zero goals however, it makes sense to couple this with an assurance that a large proportion of funding through VCMs are towards methods known to sequester carbon, many of which are nature-based such as reforestation or peatland restoration. A mosaic of solutions will be needed to achieve GHG at scale; part of the success of VCMs from an oversight perspective will be ensuring that finance is channelled to where the technologies and projects are most appropriate (Cox et al. 2018). There is also a need for long-term commitments to these GHG removal projects to avoid re-emission, as discussed in the context of soil sequestration by Murray, Sohngen and Ross (2007).
The benefits of a VCM over the compliance market is the effect the former can have on incentivising innovation. In the absence of regulation and with lower transaction costs, VCMs encourage stakeholders to test out new GHG removal methodologies. Critics point out that this may lead to false carbon credits due to a lack of quality control (Kollmuss, Zink & Polycarp, 2008). However this risk function is needed to ensure the scalability of nascent technologies that do work. Verification of the efficacy of new technologies could still be strengthened to reduce uncertainty in the market (Blaufelder et al. 2021). It also shows the importance of companies coupling VCM participation with internal operational change to be less GHG emitting, as mentioned in the case of Apple previously. A VCM in this case may be reflexive in that companies not only influence the activities in the market, but the presence of the market itself changes the companies own behaviour to look for more GHG removal internally. Consequently a positive feedback loop can establish itself.

Conclusion
The success of VCMs will only be achieved if they are viewed as supplement rather than an alternative for Governmental targets and company change. This essay has shown that consideration must be given to overseeing the efficacy of VCMs and ensuring credits have a unique contribution to GHG removal. To be deemed credible VCMs must be providing additional access to GHG removal for companies, incentivising innovation and expanding the supply of legitimate sequestration projects; all within an integrity-based framework that ties its goals to that of the Paris Agreement. The success of a VCM should in time ultimately lead to its demise as the production of GHG becomes less pervasive.



<br>
<br>
###References

Apple Inc. (2021) Apple Environmental Progress Report . https://www.apple.com/environment/pdf/Apple_Environmental_Progress_Report_2021.pdf [Accessed 13/12/2021].

Blaufelder, C., Levy, C., Mannion, P. & Pinnor, D. (2021) A blueprint for scaling voluntary carbon markets to meet the climate challenge. https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/sustainability/our-insights/a-blueprint-for-scaling-voluntary-carbon-markets-to-meet-the-climate-challenge [Accessed 14/12/2021].

Cox, E. M., Pidgeon, N., Spence, E. & Thomas, G. (2018) Blurred Lines: The Ethics and Policy of Greenhouse Gas Removal at Scale. Frontiers in Environmental Science. 6 10.3389/fenvs.2018.00038.

Díaz, S., Demissew, S., Carabias, J., Joly, C., Lonsdale, M., Ash, N., Larigauderie, A., Adhikari, J. R., Arico, S., Báldi, A., Bartuska, A., Baste, I. A., Bilgin, A., Brondizio, E., Chan, K. M., Figueroa, V. E., Duraiappah, A., Fischer, M., Hill, R., Koetz, T., Leadley, P., Lyver, P., Mace, G. M., Martin-Lopez, B., Okumura, M., Pacheco, D., Pascual, U., Pérez, E. S., Reyers, B., Roth, E., Saito, O., Scholes, R. J., Sharma, N., Tallis, H., Thaman, R., Watson, R., Yahara, T., Hamid, Z. A., Akosim, C., Al-Hafedh, Y., Allahverdiyev, R., Amankwah, E., Asah, S. T., Asfaw, Z., Bartus, G., Brooks, L. A., Caillaux, J., Dalle, G., Darnaedi, D., Driver, A., Erpul, G., Escobar-Eyzaguirre, P., Failler, P., Fouda, A. M. M., Fu, B., Gundimeda, H., Hashimoto, S., Homer, F., Lavorel, S., Lichtenstein, G., Mala, W. A., Mandivenyi, W., Matczak, P., Mbizvo, C., Mehrdadi, M., Metzger, J. P., Mikissa, J. B., Moller, H., Mooney, H. A., Mumby, P., Nagendra, H., Nesshover, C., Oteng-Yeboah, A. A., Pataki, G., Roué, M., Rubis, J., Schultz, M., Smith, P., Sumaila, R., Takeuchi, K., Thomas, S., Verma, M., Yeo-Chang, Y. & Zlatanova, D. (2015) The IPBES Conceptual Framework — connecting nature and people. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability. 14 1-16. 10.1016/j.cosust.2014.11.002.

Guigon, P. (2010) Voluntary Carbon Markets: How can they Serve Climate Policies? OECD Environment Working Papers. (19), http://econpapers.repec.org/paper/oecenvaaa/19-en.htm.

Hanley, N., Shogren, J. F. & White, B. (2019) Introduction to environmental economics. [unknown] Third edition edition. Oxford, Oxford University Press. http://bvbr.bib-bvb.de:8991/F?func=service&doc_library=BVB01&local_base=BVB01&doc_number=030252924&sequence=000002&line_number=0001&func_code=DB_RECORDS&service_type=MEDIA.

Hyams, K. & Fawcett, T. (2013) The ethics of carbon offsetting. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews. Climate Change. 4 (2), 91-98. 10.1002/wcc.207.

Kollmuss, A., Zink, H. & Polycarp, C. (2008) Making Sense of the Voluntary Carbon Market: A Comparison of Carbon Offset Standards. WWF Germany.

Kreibich, N. & Hermwille, L. (2021) Caught in between: credibility and feasibility of the voluntary carbon market post-2020. Climate Policy. 21 (7), 939-957. 10.1080/14693062.2021.1948384.

Lang, S., Blum, M. & Leipold, S. (2019) What future for the voluntary carbon offset market after Paris? An explorative study based on the Discursive Agency Approach. Climate Policy. 19 (4), 414-426. 10.1080/14693062.2018.1556152.

Michaelowa, A., Hermwille, L., Obergassel, W. & Butzengeiger, S. (2019) Additionality revisited: guarding the integrity of market mechanisms under the Paris Agreement. Climate Policy. 19 (10), 1211-1224. 10.1080/14693062.2019.1628695.

Murray, B., Sohngen, B. & Ross, M. (2007) Economic consequences of consideration of permanence, leakage and additionality for soil carbon sequestration projects. Climatic Change. 80 (1), 127-143. 10.1007/s10584-006-9169-4.

Spaargaren, G. & Mol, A. P. J. (2013) Carbon flows, carbon markets, and low-carbon lifestyles: reflecting on the role of markets in climate governance. Environmental Politics. 22 (1), 174-193. https://www.narcis.nl/publication/RecordID/oai:library.wur.nl:wurpubs%2F436883.

Streck, C. (2021) How voluntary carbon markets can drive climate ambition. Journal of Energy & Natural Resources Law. 39 (3), 367-374. 10.1080/02646811.2021.1881275.

The Economist. (2020) The world urgently needs to expand its use of carbon prices. The Economist.

United Nations. (2021) net-zero coalition . https://www.un.org/en/climatechange/net-zero-coalition [Accessed 13/12/2021].

VCMI. (2021) A Global Consultation Report of the Voluntary
Carbon Markets Integrity Initiative (VCMI). https://vcmintegrity.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/07/VCMI-Consultation-Report.pdf .
