---
layout: post
title:  "What do we do with all these trees?"
date:   2021-10-31
categories: [sustainability]
tags: {essay}
---

Ensuring sufficient infrastructure and housing, and the all-encompassing problem of climate change and environmental degradation are often portrayed as contradictory. This is a delicate issue in the UK where there is a tension between supplying necessary new-builds and the preservation of the rural landscape. Theresa May’s Government put forward a plan to build 300,000 homes a year back in 2017 (Homes England, 2018). Whilst this hasn’t come to fruition in such high numbers there has still been consistent pressure on the availability of land for new housing developments. Rules of planning have slowly changed to favour new development; for example a 2012 change allows easier access for developers to farmland near towns (The Economist, 2021b).

The Covid-19 pandemic has done little to relax the reigns on new development, albeit we have seen a huge shift in the way people work and live their lives (Gallent & Madeddu, 2021). Alongside this ongoing housing contention is the narrative of the UK’s titanic tree-planting ambitions for carbon sequestration. The question is what we do with those trees felled as part of the rotational crop system. One area of promise is the use of Cross-Laminated Timber (CLT) for construction. I will explore this as a solution to couple the two competing narratives of increased tree-planting and increased demand for housing.


### CLT viability

The UK’s Committee on Climate Change noted a need to increase the rate of tree-planting from around ten thousand hectares a year to thirty thousand to reach the 2050 targets of CO2 removal (Committee on Climate Change, 2019). We can assume this is a determined path to afforestation over the forthcoming decades. In the long-term using a sustainable forestry rotation will allow a more efficient carbon sequestration system as trees reach a decelerating rate of carbon stock. Sustainably harvesting timber for construction can provide the opportunity to sequester more CO2 than the counterfactual of allowing the forest to grow without interference (Ramage et al., 2017). There is still a need to utilise the cut-down trees to ensure this is a more effective carbon-sequestering system. As mentioned earlier, it’s through construction we can direct the majority of wood as a product in this forestry cycle.

The Government needs to consider the trade-off in expanding tree planting; there will inevitably be some change to existing land-use. For example less productive or smaller farmland may well shift towards the forestry industry (Burke et al., 2021). This low-value agricultural land is the most economically feasible for forestry creation (Forster, Eilidh, 2021). The Government needs to manage this potential alteration of the rural job market. Given this, the development of the forestry industry makes sense to pursue if it is embedded in a cyclical system alongside the construction industry: there will be strong demand over the forthcoming decades provided construction for wood is made readily available and becomes widely used. Whereas using the food for fuel would mean competing against the growing renewables sector.

Cross-laminated timber (CLT) is a European innovation. Softwood timber is kiln-dried and stacked in layers of opposing directions and sealed with adhesive to create a robust and versatile building material. The UK currently lacks commercial CLT production and therefore imports it from Europe (Crawford et al., 2015). To scale its forestry industry the UK should look to grow suitable softwood for CLT and begin developing its own commercial production, as an integrated extension of the forestry industry. A promising species is the Sitka Spruce which is ubiquitous in Scotland and accounts for half of the UK’s softwood (Crawford et al., 2015). When looking at the optimal tree-planting mosaic for CLT viability, consideration should also be given to the carbon sequestration, biodiversity as well as the cultural shift required to popularise its use.


### Carbon Sequestration

Construction is the most encouraging use of wood for storing carbon (Read, D. J. (David J. ), 2009). The current construction industry is one of the heaviest users of resources globally (Jones et al. 2016) and in 2016 the production of steel and iron was responsible for 7.2% of global greenhouse gases, with cement production accounting for around 3% (Ritchie & Roser, 2020). Even if cement could find a way to be produced from renewable energy the chemical process itself produces CO2 as a by-product of the conversion of limestone to lime. Therefore we need to look at better alternatives to supplement or replace the intrinsic construction materials, rather than simply focusing on the source of energy input into the process.

From a carbon-sequestration perspective CLT has two benefits. Not only does it reduce the footprint of steel and concrete, but in using CLT you are locking carbon into the building itself. It is only if the building is then dismantled and the wood burnt that the CO2 is released; in this case the wood itself remains carbon neutral. However when you consider the counterfactual of using concrete and steel then CLT use is closer to a real effect of being carbon positive, particularly if the next wave of trees are planted immediately after felling and we assume the buildings are designed for longevity. It only makes sense to expand forestry in the UK if there are these second-order CO2 sequestration effects from how the felled trees are used. The industry will also have to consider the trade-off between carbon sequestration and the optimal wood for CLT. For example the Sitka Spruce, which as previously mentioned shows promise for CLT use, stores 42% less carbon than mixed conservation forests and 61% less than unharvested conifers, but is more effective than native broadleaf forests over a 100 year timeline (Forster, Eilidh J. et al., 2021). The study also highlights how a rotational commercial forestry system may take 90 years to catch up with unharvested conservation forests in terms of decarbonization. Either way this shows the importance of the second-order use of the harvested timber.


### Biodiversity

While the UK develops a sustainable forestry system, considerable thought needs to be given to existing natives. Biodiversity considerations should account for the protection of ancient trees alongside their associated species. For example the English Oak supports 2300 species, hundreds of which it are reliant on it for survival (Defra, 2021). This has been mentioned as an area of consideration for the Government yet it’s still unclear as to how this might play out nationally alongside the forestry industry. This is a pressing issue as a wave of diseases are currently pervading native tree species particularly due to the importation of non-natives. Trees have proven they are not meant to move. 150 million Ash trees are vulnerable to Ash Dieback; of those infected 90-99% are estimated to die (The Economist, 2021a). Assuming the plan to plant millions of trees is determined, the UK Government needs to consider where these trees are planted and where they come from so as to avoid an ecological crisis amongst the native species.

The growing use of CLT will change how we come to think of native woodlands as an ecosystem service. There is a contention between seeing the natural world as a good, a service or as a manager of the ecosystem processes. Biodiversity is kernel to this balance. To manage ecosystems effectively in an increasingly pressured natural world necessitates ‘identifying and analysing all roles both for the optimisation of ecosystem service delivery and for the conservation of species, habitats and landscapes.’ (Mace, Norris & Fitter, 2012, p. 25). The danger of a successful forestry system is it encourages woodlands to be seen exclusively as a good. This outlook neglects the ecosystem as a whole and the downstream ecological benefits of biodiversity amongst the domestic tree population. This will need to be considered when looking at scaling up CLT production from single species timber such as the Sitka Spruce. Monoculture young woodlands may be at odds with biodiversity ambitions; old growths are not only valuable for biodiversity but can build up carbon through decomposition of organic soil matter (Read, D. J. (David J. ), 2009).


### Cultural challenges

The Covid-19 pandemic has changed patterns of living. We may see an increase in the demand for housing outside of London, and with this an increased demand for alternative ways of working with offices and amenities closer to where people live. It is a more dynamic and holistic form of living, yet one that may in time strain existing rural infrastructure and resources (Gallent & Madeddu, 2021).

The problem with the existing infrastructure modality is the inelasticity with which change can be implemented; people’s preferences change quicker than the construction industry. This was noticeable during the covid-19 lockdowns, particularly in urban areas. Cities had to conjure up temporary innovations to cope with the changing behavior of locals (Carlos Moreno et al., 2021), hence the subsequent calls for the 15-minute city proposed by Moreno. The lesson here is the shift away from the commuter paradigm towards demand for closer access to all living amenities, including office space. If looking to grow the use of CLT it’s better focus on this holistic housing development in less densely populated areas.

Amongst the rural landscape there is naturally a greater resonance with wooden development. Even if the buildings themselves end up lasting longer than their concrete counterparts there is still a psychological effect that the wooden structure is less permanent. Wooden structures can be designed as divisible, which may mean the buildings themselves are easier to remove and change. CLT construction projects are also quicker to complete than those of concrete and steel (Jones et al., 2016), which again benefits the flexibility required in the industry to meet the growing demand for detached housing on the urban-rural fringe.  

To make construction more adaptable and resilient supply-chains ought to be localized through the growth of a sustainable UK forestry system for CLT. Yet the UK is not known for its use of wood in construction; it doesn’t have the same legacy of using timber as Austria or Scandinavia (Read, D. J. (David J. ), 2009). CLT technology has been around since the late 1980s, yet it has been limited in its use in the UK (Crawford et al., 2015). This is in part because the UK does not mass-produce the material themselves, as mentioned earlier. There is also conservatism embedded in the UK construction culture, despite the evidence of wood’s technical capability  (Read, D. J. (David J. ), 2009). Making CLT a committed output for the forestry system will require a cultural shift amongst developers, architects and homeowners towards an acceptance of its utility. This is why it makes sense to focus on the use of CLT in the growing communities outside of the dense UK cities who are more geographically connected to the source of timber. Detached housing and holistic living projects in areas of low population density are a suitable first-step for CLT use, which will ease concerns over fire safety and wood distortion.


### Conclusion

Despite the great promise and feasibility in the field of CLT it’s still relatively untested at scale in the UK, particularly given the timber is rarely native. However there is a strong opportunity to transition low population density housing and living projects to a CLT building material if the UK Government incentivises this cultural shift from the growing forestry sector, alongside potential uses of biochar as fertiliser and wooden waste to be used as fuel. Construction through CLT use tackles two birds with one stone by locking carbon into the buildings and requiring less use of the alternative, more resource-intensive steel and concrete. Consequently, the UK should prioritise the growth of this industry so long as there is a holistic outlook in terms of ensuring biodiversity and managing rural land-use. If CLT becomes effective on this scale then the question will move onto whether this can become a suitable building material in more densely populated cities. It’s widespread use however will require not just a technological revolution, but a psychological one.







### References

Burke, T., Rowland, C., Whyatt, J. D., Blackburn, G. A. & Abbatt, J. (2021) Achieving national scale targets for carbon sequestration through afforestation: Geospatial assessment of feasibility and policy implications. Environmental Science & Policy. 124 279-292.10.1016/j.envsci.2021.06.023.

Carlos Moreno, Didier Chabaud, Catherine Gall & Florent Pratlong. (2021) Introducing the “15-Minute City”: Sustainability, Resilience and Place Identity in Future Post-Pandemic Cities. Smart Cities. 4 (1), 93.10.3390/smartcities4010006.

Committee on Climate Change. (2019) Net Zero: the UK's contribution to stopping global warming. Committee on Climate Change.

Crawford, D., Hairstans, R., Smith, S. & Papastavrou, P. (2015) Viability of cross-laminated timber from UK resources. Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers. Construction Materials. 168 (3), 110-120.10.1680/coma.14.00064.

Defra. (2021) The England Trees Action
Plan 2021-2024. https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/987432/england-trees-action-plan.pdf.

Forster, E. (2021) Commercial forestry is vital for mitigating climate change. Institute of Chartered Foresters.

Forster, E. J., Healey, J. R., Dymond, C. & Styles, D. (2021) Commercial afforestation can deliver effective climate change mitigation under multiple decarbonisation pathways. Nature Communications. 12 (3831), 10.1038/s41467-021-24084-x.

Gallent, N. & Madeddu, M. (2021) Covid-19 and London's Decentralising Housing Market - What are the Planning Implications? Planning, Practice & Research. 36 (5), 567-577.10.1080/02697459.2021.1964782.

Homes England. (2018) Homes England strategic plan 2018 to 2023. https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/homes-england-strategic-plan-201819-to-202223/homes-england-strategic-plan-2018-to-2023 .

Jones, K., Stegemann, J., Sykes, J. & Winslow, P. (2016) Adoption of unconventional approaches in construction: The case of cross-laminated timber. Construction & Building Materials. 125 690-702.10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2016.08.088.

Mace, G. M., Norris, K. & Fitter, A. H. (2012) Biodiversity and ecosystem services: a multilayered relationship. Trends in Ecology & Evolution (Amsterdam). 27 (1), 19-26.10.1016/j.tree.2011.08.006.

Ramage, M. H., Burridge, H., Busse-Wicher, M., Fereday, G., Reynolds, T., Shah, D. U., Wu, G., Yu, L., Fleming, P., Densley-Tingley, D., Allwood, J., Dupree, P., Linden, P. F. & Scherman, O. (2017) The wood from the trees: The use of timber in construction. Renewable & Sustainable Energy Reviews. 68 333-359.10.1016/j.rser.2016.09.107.

Read, D. J. (David J. ). (2009) Combating climate change: A role for UK forests; An assessment of the potential of the UK's trees and woodlands to mitigate and adapt to climate change; The synthesis report. Key Non Parliamentary Papers 2009.

Ritchie, H. & Roser, M. (2020) CO₂ and Greenhouse Gas Emissions. https://ourworldindata.org/co2-and-other-greenhouse-gas-emissions [Accessed 27 Oct 2021].

The Economist. (2021a) Britain’s trees are being felled by diseases. https://www-economist-com.iclibezp1.cc.ic.ac.uk/britain/2021/10/09/britains-trees-are-being-felled-by-diseases .

The Economist. (2021b) England is building more homes than it has for many years. https://www-economist-com.iclibezp1.cc.ic.ac.uk/britain/2021/07/15/england-is-building-more-homes-than-it-has-for-many-years .
